 
"Two households, both alike in dignity,"  
"In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,"  
"From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,"  
"Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean."  
"From forth the fatal loins of these two foes"  
"A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life,"  
"Whose misadventured piteous overthrows"  
"Do with their death bury their parents' strife."  
"The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,"  
"And the continuance of their parents' rage,"  
"Which, but their children's end, nought could remove,"  
"Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage,"  
"The which if you with patient ears attend,"  
"What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend."  
"SCENE I. Verona. A public place."  
"Enter SAMPSON and GREGORY, of the house of Capulet, armed with swords and bucklers"  
"Gregory, o' my word, we'll not carry coals."  
"No, for then we should be colliers."  
"I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw."  
"Ay, while you live, draw your neck out o' the collar."  
"I strike quickly, being moved."  
"But thou art not quickly moved to strike."  
"A dog of the house of Montague moves me."  
"To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand:"  
"therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away."  
"A dog of that house shall move me to stand: I will"  
"take the wall of any man or maid of Montague's."  
"That shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes"  
"to the wall."  
"True, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels,"  
"are ever thrust to the wall: therefore I will push"  
"Montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids"  
"to the wall."  
"The quarrel is between our masters and us their men."  
"'Tis all one, I will show myself a tyrant: when I"  
"have fought with the men, I will be cruel with the"  
"maids, and cut off their heads."  
"The heads of the maids?"  
"Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads,"  
"take it in what sense thou wilt."  
"They must take it in sense that feel it."  
"Me they shall feel while I am able to stand: and"  
"'tis known I am a pretty piece of flesh."  
"'Tis well thou art not fish, if thou hadst, thou"  
"hadst been poor John. Draw thy tool! here comes"  
"two of the house of the Montagues."  
"My naked weapon is out: quarrel, I will back thee."  
"How! turn thy back and run?"  
"Fear me not."  
"No, marry, I fear thee!"  
"Let us take the law of our sides, let them begin."  
"I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as"  
"they list."  
"Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them,"  
"which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it."  
"Enter ABRAHAM and BALTHASAR"  
"Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?"  
"I do bite my thumb, sir."  
"Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?"  
"[Aside to GREGORY]  Is the law of our side, if I say"  
ay?  
No.  
"No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but I"  
"bite my thumb, sir."  
"Do you quarrel, sir?"  
"Quarrel sir! no, sir."  
"If you do, sir, I am for you: I serve as good a man as you."  
"No better."  
"Well, sir."  
"Say 'better:' here comes one of my master's kinsmen."  
"Yes, better, sir."  
"You lie."  
"Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow."  
"They fight"  
"Enter BENVOLIO"  
"Part, fools!"  
"Put up your swords, you know not what you do."  
"Beats down their swords"  
"Enter TYBALT"  
"What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?"  
"Turn thee, Benvolio, look upon thy death."  
"I do but keep the peace: put up thy sword,"  
"Or manage it to part these men with me."  
"What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word,"  
"As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee:"  
"Have at thee, coward!"  
"They fight"  
"Enter, several of both houses, who join the fray, then enter Citizens, with clubs"  
"Clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down!"  
"Down with the Capulets! down with the Montagues!"  
"Enter CAPULET in his gown, and LADY CAPULET"  
"What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!"  
"A crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?"  
"My sword, I say! Old Montague is come,"  
"And flourishes his blade in spite of me."  
"Enter MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE"  
"Thou villain Capulet,--Hold me not, let me go."  
"Thou shalt not stir a foot to seek a foe."  
"Enter PRINCE, with Attendants"  
"Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,"  
"Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel,--"  
"Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,"  
"That quench the fire of your pernicious rage"  
"With purple fountains issuing from your veins,"  
"On pain of torture, from those bloody hands"  
"Throw your mistemper'd weapons to the ground,"  
"And hear the sentence of your moved prince."  
"Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word,"  
"By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,"  
"Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets,"  
"And made Verona's ancient citizens"  
"Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments,"  
"To wield old partisans, in hands as old,"  
"Canker'd with peace, to part your canker'd hate:"  
"If ever you disturb our streets again,"  
"Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace."  
"For this time, all the rest depart away:"  
"You Capulet, shall go along with me:"  
"And, Montague, come you this afternoon,"  
"To know our further pleasure in this case,"  
"To old Free-town, our common judgment-place."  
"Once more, on pain of death, all men depart."  
"Exeunt all but MONTAGUE, LADY MONTAGUE, and BENVOLIO"  
"Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?"  
"Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?"  
"Here were the servants of your adversary,"  
"And yours, close fighting ere I did approach:"  
"I drew to part them: in the instant came"  
"The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepared,"  
"Which, as he breathed defiance to my ears,"  
"He swung about his head and cut the winds,"  
"Who nothing hurt withal hiss'd him in scorn:"  
"While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,"  
"Came more and more and fought on part and part,"  
"Till the prince came, who parted either part."  
"O, where is Romeo? saw you him to-day?"  
"Right glad I am he was not at this fray."  
"Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun"  
"Peer'd forth the golden window of the east,"  
"A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad,"  
"Where, underneath the grove of sycamore"  
"That westward rooteth from the city's side,"  
"So early walking did I see your son:"  
"Towards him I made, but he was ware of me"  
"And stole into the covert of the wood:"  
"I, measuring his affections by my own,"  
"That most are busied when they're most alone,"  
"Pursued my humour not pursuing his,"  
"And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me."  
"Many a morning hath he there been seen,"  
"With tears augmenting the fresh morning dew."  
"Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs,"  
"But all so soon as the all-cheering sun"  
"Should in the furthest east begin to draw"  
"The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,"  
"Away from the light steals home my heavy son,"  
"And private in his chamber pens himself,"  
"Shuts up his windows, locks far daylight out"  
"And makes himself an artificial night:"  
"Black and portentous must this humour prove,"  
"Unless good counsel may the cause remove."  
"My noble uncle, do you know the cause?"  
"I neither know it nor can learn of him."  
"Have you importuned him by any means?"  
"Both by myself and many other friends:"  
"But he, his own affections' counsellor,"  
"Is to himself--I will not say how true--"  
"But to himself so secret and so close,"  
"So far from sounding and discovery,"  
"As is the bud bit with an envious worm,"  
"Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air,"  
"Or dedicate his beauty to the sun."  
"Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow."  
"We would as willingly give cure as know."  
"Enter ROMEO"  
"See, where he comes: so please you, step aside,"  
"I'll know his grievance, or be much denied."  
"I would thou wert so happy by thy stay,"  
"To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away."  
"Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE"  
"Good-morrow, cousin."  
"Is the day so young?"  
"But new struck nine."  
"Ay me! sad hours seem long."  
"Was that my father that went hence so fast?"  
"It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?"  
"Not having that, which, having, makes them short."  
"In love?"  
Out--  
"Of love?"  
"Out of her favour, where I am in love."  
"Alas, that love, so gentle in his view,"  
"Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!"  
"Alas, that love, whose view is muffled still,"  
"Should, without eyes, see pathways to his will!"  
"Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?"  
"Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all."  
"Here's much to do with hate, but more with love."  
"Why, then, O brawling love! O loving hate!"  
"O any thing, of nothing first create!"  
"O heavy lightness! serious vanity!"  
"Mis-shapen chaos of well-seeming forms!"  
"Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire,"  
"sick health!"  
"Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is!"  
"This love feel I, that feel no love in this."  
"Dost thou not laugh?"  
"No, coz, I rather weep."  
"Good heart, at what?"  
"At thy good heart's oppression."  
"Why, such is love's transgression."  
"Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,"  
"Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest"  
"With more of thine: this love that thou hast shown"  
"Doth add more grief to too much of mine own."  
"Love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs,"  
"Being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes,"  
"Being vex'd a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears:"  
"What is it else? a madness most discreet,"  
"A choking gall and a preserving sweet."  
"Farewell, my coz."  
"Soft! I will go along,"  
"An if you leave me so, you do me wrong."  
"Tut, I have lost myself, I am not here,"  
"This is not Romeo, he's some other where."  
"Tell me in sadness, who is that you love."  
"What, shall I groan and tell thee?"  
"Groan! why, no."  
"But sadly tell me who."  
"Bid a sick man in sadness make his will:"  
"Ah, word ill urged to one that is so ill!"  
"In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman."  
"I aim'd so near, when I supposed you loved."  
"A right good mark-man! And she's fair I love."  
"A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit."  
"Well, in that hit you miss: she'll not be hit"  
"With Cupid's arrow, she hath Dian's wit,"  
"And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,"  
"From love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd."  
"She will not stay the siege of loving terms,"  
"Nor bide the encounter of assailing eyes,"  
"Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold:"  
"O, she is rich in beauty, only poor,"  
"That when she dies with beauty dies her store."  
"Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?"  
"She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste,"  
"For beauty starved with her severity"  
"Cuts beauty off from all posterity."  
"She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,"  
"To merit bliss by making me despair:"  
"She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow"  
"Do I live dead that live to tell it now."  
"Be ruled by me, forget to think of her."  
"O, teach me how I should forget to think."  
"By giving liberty unto thine eyes,"  
"Examine other beauties."  
"'Tis the way"  
"To call hers exquisite, in question more:"  
"These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows"  
"Being black put us in mind they hide the fair,"  
"He that is strucken blind cannot forget"  
"The precious treasure of his eyesight lost:"  
"Show me a mistress that is passing fair,"  
"What doth her beauty serve, but as a note"  
"Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?"  
"Farewell: thou canst not teach me to forget."  
"I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. A street."  
"Enter CAPULET, PARIS, and Servant"  
"But Montague is bound as well as I,"  
"In penalty alike, and 'tis not hard, I think,"  
"For men so old as we to keep the peace."  
"Of honourable reckoning are you both,"  
"And pity 'tis you lived at odds so long."  
"But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?"  
"But saying o'er what I have said before:"  
"My child is yet a stranger in the world,"  
"She hath not seen the change of fourteen years,"  
"Let two more summers wither in their pride,"  
"Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride."  
"Younger than she are happy mothers made."  
"And too soon marr'd are those so early made."  
"The earth hath swallow'd all my hopes but she,"  
"She is the hopeful lady of my earth:"  
"But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart,"  
"My will to her consent is but a part,"  
"An she agree, within her scope of choice"  
"Lies my consent and fair according voice."  
"This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,"  
"Whereto I have invited many a guest,"  
"Such as I love, and you, among the store,"  
"One more, most welcome, makes my number more."  
"At my poor house look to behold this night"  
"Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light:"  
"Such comfort as do lusty young men feel"  
"When well-apparell'd April on the heel"  
"Of limping winter treads, even such delight"  
"Among fresh female buds shall you this night"  
"Inherit at my house, hear all, all see,"  
"And like her most whose merit most shall be:"  
"Which on more view, of many mine being one"  
"May stand in number, though in reckoning none,"  
"Come, go with me."  
"To Servant, giving a paper"  
"Go, sirrah, trudge about"  
"Through fair Verona, find those persons out"  
"Whose names are written there, and to them say,"  
"My house and welcome on their pleasure stay."  
"Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS"  
"Find them out whose names are written here! It is"  
"written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his"  
"yard, and the tailor with his last, the fisher with"  
"his pencil, and the painter with his nets, but I am"  
"sent to find those persons whose names are here"  
"writ, and can never find what names the writing"  
"person hath here writ. I must to the learned.--In good time."  
"Enter BENVOLIO and ROMEO"  
"Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning,"  
"One pain is lessen'd by another's anguish,"  
"Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning,"  
"One desperate grief cures with another's languish:"  
"Take thou some new infection to thy eye,"  
"And the rank poison of the old will die."  
"Your plaintain-leaf is excellent for that."  
"For what, I pray thee?"  
"For your broken shin."  
"Why, Romeo, art thou mad?"  
"Not mad, but bound more than a mad-man is,"  
"Shut up in prison, kept without my food,"  
"Whipp'd and tormented and--God-den, good fellow."  
"God gi' god-den. I pray, sir, can you read?"  
"Ay, mine own fortune in my misery."  
"Perhaps you have learned it without book: but, I"  
"pray, can you read any thing you see?"  
"Ay, if I know the letters and the language."  
"Ye say honestly: rest you merry!"  
"Stay, fellow, I can read."  
Reads  
"'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters,"  
"County Anselme and his beauteous sisters, the lady"  
"widow of Vitravio, Signior Placentio and his lovely"  
"nieces, Mercutio and his brother Valentine, mine"  
"uncle Capulet, his wife and daughters, my fair niece"  
"Rosaline, Livia, Signior Valentio and his cousin"  
"Tybalt, Lucio and the lively Helena.' A fair"  
"assembly: whither should they come?"  
Up.  
Whither?  
"To supper, to our house."  
"Whose house?"  
"My master's."  
"Indeed, I should have ask'd you that before."  
"Now I'll tell you without asking: my master is the"  
"great rich Capulet, and if you be not of the house"  
"of Montagues, I pray, come and crush a cup of wine."  
"Rest you merry!"  
Exit  
"At this same ancient feast of Capulet's"  
"Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lovest,"  
"With all the admired beauties of Verona:"  
"Go thither, and, with unattainted eye,"  
"Compare her face with some that I shall show,"  
"And I will make thee think thy swan a crow."  
"When the devout religion of mine eye"  
"Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires,"  
"And these, who often drown'd could never die,"  
"Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!"  
"One fairer than my love! the all-seeing sun"  
"Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun."  
"Tut, you saw her fair, none else being by,"  
"Herself poised with herself in either eye:"  
"But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd"  
"Your lady's love against some other maid"  
"That I will show you shining at this feast,"  
"And she shall scant show well that now shows best."  
"I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,"  
"But to rejoice in splendor of mine own."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE III. A room in Capulet's house."  
"Enter LADY CAPULET and Nurse"  
"Nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me."  
"Now, by my maidenhead, at twelve year old,"  
"I bade her come. What, lamb! what, ladybird!"  
"God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!"  
"Enter JULIET"  
"How now! who calls?"  
"Your mother."  
"Madam, I am here."  
"What is your will?"  
"This is the matter:--Nurse, give leave awhile,"  
"We must talk in secret:--nurse, come back again,"  
"I have remember'd me, thou's hear our counsel."  
"Thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age."  
"Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour."  
"She's not fourteen."  
"I'll lay fourteen of my teeth,--"  
"And yet, to my teeth be it spoken, I have but four--"  
"She is not fourteen. How long is it now"  
"To Lammas-tide?"  
"A fortnight and odd days."  
"Even or odd, of all days in the year,"  
"Come Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen."  
"Susan and she--God rest all Christian souls!--"  
"Were of an age: well, Susan is with God,"  
"She was too good for me: but, as I said,"  
"On Lammas-eve at night shall she be fourteen,"  
"That shall she, marry, I remember it well."  
"'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years,"  
"And she was wean'd,--I never shall forget it,--"  
"Of all the days of the year, upon that day:"  
"For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,"  
"Sitting in the sun under the dove-house wall,"  
"My lord and you were then at Mantua:--"  
"Nay, I do bear a brain:--but, as I said,"  
"When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple"  
"Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,"  
"To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!"  
"Shake quoth the dove-house: 'twas no need, I trow,"  
"To bid me trudge:"  
"And since that time it is eleven years,"  
"For then she could stand alone, nay, by the rood,"  
"She could have run and waddled all about,"  
"For even the day before, she broke her brow:"  
"And then my husband--God be with his soul!"  
"A' was a merry man--took up the child:"  
"'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?"  
"Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit,"  
"Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidame,"  
"The pretty wretch left crying and said 'Ay.'"  
"To see, now, how a jest shall come about!"  
"I warrant, an I should live a thousand years,"  
"I never should forget it: 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,"  
"And, pretty fool, it stinted and said 'Ay.'"  
"Enough of this, I pray thee, hold thy peace."  
"Yes, madam: yet I cannot choose but laugh,"  
"To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'"  
"And yet, I warrant, it had upon its brow"  
"A bump as big as a young cockerel's stone,"  
"A parlous knock, and it cried bitterly:"  
"'Yea,' quoth my husband,'fall'st upon thy face?"  
"Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age,"  
"Wilt thou not, Jule?' it stinted and said 'Ay.'"  
"And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I."  
"Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!"  
"Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nursed:"  
"An I might live to see thee married once,"  
"I have my wish."  
"Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme"  
"I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,"  
"How stands your disposition to be married?"  
"It is an honour that I dream not of."  
"An honour! were not I thine only nurse,"  
"I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat."  
"Well, think of marriage now, younger than you,"  
"Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,"  
"Are made already mothers: by my count,"  
"I was your mother much upon these years"  
"That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:"  
"The valiant Paris seeks you for his love."  
"A man, young lady! lady, such a man"  
"As all the world--why, he's a man of wax."  
"Verona's summer hath not such a flower."  
"Nay, he's a flower, in faith, a very flower."  
"What say you? can you love the gentleman?"  
"This night you shall behold him at our feast,"  
"Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,"  
"And find delight writ there with beauty's pen,"  
"Examine every married lineament,"  
"And see how one another lends content"  
"And what obscured in this fair volume lies"  
"Find written in the margent of his eyes."  
"This precious book of love, this unbound lover,"  
"To beautify him, only lacks a cover:"  
"The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride"  
"For fair without the fair within to hide:"  
"That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,"  
"That in gold clasps locks in the golden story,"  
"So shall you share all that he doth possess,"  
"By having him, making yourself no less."  
"No less! nay, bigger, women grow by men."  
"Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?"  
"I'll look to like, if looking liking move:"  
"But no more deep will I endart mine eye"  
"Than your consent gives strength to make it fly."  
"Enter a Servant"  
"Madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you"  
"called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in"  
"the pantry, and every thing in extremity. I must"  
"hence to wait, I beseech you, follow straight."  
"We follow thee."  
"Exit Servant"  
"Juliet, the county stays."  
"Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE IV. A street."  
"Enter ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, with five or six Maskers, Torch-bearers, and others"  
"What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?"  
"Or shall we on without a apology?"  
"The date is out of such prolixity:"  
"We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,"  
"Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,"  
"Scaring the ladies like a crow-keeper,"  
"Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke"  
"After the prompter, for our entrance:"  
"But let them measure us by what they will,"  
"We'll measure them a measure, and be gone."  
"Give me a torch: I am not for this ambling,"  
"Being but heavy, I will bear the light."  
"Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance."  
"Not I, believe me: you have dancing shoes"  
"With nimble soles: I have a soul of lead"  
"So stakes me to the ground I cannot move."  
"You are a lover, borrow Cupid's wings,"  
"And soar with them above a common bound."  
"I am too sore enpierced with his shaft"  
"To soar with his light feathers, and so bound,"  
"I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe:"  
"Under love's heavy burden do I sink."  
"And, to sink in it, should you burden love,"  
"Too great oppression for a tender thing."  
"Is love a tender thing? it is too rough,"  
"Too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn."  
"If love be rough with you, be rough with love,"  
"Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down."  
"Give me a case to put my visage in:"  
"A visor for a visor! what care I"  
"What curious eye doth quote deformities?"  
"Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me."  
"Come, knock and enter, and no sooner in,"  
"But every man betake him to his legs."  
"A torch for me: let wantons light of heart"  
"Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels,"  
"For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,"  
"I'll be a candle-holder, and look on."  
"The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done."  
"Tut, dun's the mouse, the constable's own word:"  
"If thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire"  
"Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st"  
"Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!"  
"Nay, that's not so."  
"I mean, sir, in delay"  
"We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day."  
"Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits"  
"Five times in that ere once in our five wits."  
"And we mean well in going to this mask,"  
"But 'tis no wit to go."  
"Why, may one ask?"  
"I dream'd a dream to-night."  
"And so did I."  
"Well, what was yours?"  
"That dreamers often lie."  
"In bed asleep, while they do dream things true."  
"O, then, I see Queen Mab hath been with you."  
"She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes"  
"In shape no bigger than an agate-stone"  
"On the fore-finger of an alderman,"  
"Drawn with a team of little atomies"  
"Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep,"  
"Her wagon-spokes made of long spiders' legs,"  
"The cover of the wings of grasshoppers,"  
"The traces of the smallest spider's web,"  
"The collars of the moonshine's watery beams,"  
"Her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film,"  
"Her wagoner a small grey-coated gnat,"  
"Not so big as a round little worm"  
"Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid,"  
"Her chariot is an empty hazel-nut"  
"Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,"  
"Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers."  
"And in this state she gallops night by night"  
"Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love,"  
"O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on court'sies straight,"  
"O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees,"  
"O'er ladies ' lips, who straight on kisses dream,"  
"Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,"  
"Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are:"  
"Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,"  
"And then dreams he of smelling out a suit,"  
"And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail"  
"Tickling a parson's nose as a' lies asleep,"  
"Then dreams, he of another benefice:"  
"Sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,"  
"And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,"  
"Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,"  
"Of healths five-fathom deep, and then anon"  
"Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,"  
"And being thus frighted swears a prayer or two"  
"And sleeps again. This is that very Mab"  
"That plats the manes of horses in the night,"  
"And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs,"  
"Which once untangled, much misfortune bodes:"  
"This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,"  
"That presses them and learns them first to bear,"  
"Making them women of good carriage:"  
"This is she--"  
"Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!"  
"Thou talk'st of nothing."  
"True, I talk of dreams,"  
"Which are the children of an idle brain,"  
"Begot of nothing but vain fantasy,"  
"Which is as thin of substance as the air"  
"And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes"  
"Even now the frozen bosom of the north,"  
"And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,"  
"Turning his face to the dew-dropping south."  
"This wind, you talk of, blows us from ourselves,"  
"Supper is done, and we shall come too late."  
"I fear, too early: for my mind misgives"  
"Some consequence yet hanging in the stars"  
"Shall bitterly begin his fearful date"  
"With this night's revels and expire the term"  
"Of a despised life closed in my breast"  
"By some vile forfeit of untimely death."  
"But He, that hath the steerage of my course,"  
"Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen."  
"Strike, drum."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE V. A hall in Capulet's house."  
"Musicians waiting. Enter Servingmen with napkins"  
"Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away? He"  
"shift a trencher? he scrape a trencher!"  
"When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's"  
"hands and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing."  
"Away with the joint-stools, remove the"  
"court-cupboard, look to the plate. Good thou, save"  
"me a piece of marchpane, and, as thou lovest me, let"  
"the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell."  
"Antony, and Potpan!"  
"Ay, boy, ready."  
"You are looked for and called for, asked for and"  
"sought for, in the great chamber."  
"We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys, be"  
"brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all."  
"Enter CAPULET, with JULIET and others of his house, meeting the Guests and Maskers"  
"Welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes"  
"Unplagued with corns will have a bout with you."  
"Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all"  
"Will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty,"  
"She, I'll swear, hath corns, am I come near ye now?"  
"Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day"  
"That I have worn a visor and could tell"  
"A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,"  
"Such as would please: 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone:"  
"You are welcome, gentlemen! come, musicians, play."  
"A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls."  
"Music plays, and they dance"  
"More light, you knaves, and turn the tables up,"  
"And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot."  
"Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well."  
"Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,"  
"For you and I are past our dancing days:"  
"How long is't now since last yourself and I"  
"Were in a mask?"  
"By'r lady, thirty years."  
"What, man! 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much:"  
"'Tis since the nuptials of Lucentio,"  
"Come pentecost as quickly as it will,"  
"Some five and twenty years, and then we mask'd."  
"'Tis more, 'tis more, his son is elder, sir,"  
"His son is thirty."  
"Will you tell me that?"  
"His son was but a ward two years ago."  
"[To a Servingman]  What lady is that, which doth"  
"enrich the hand"  
"Of yonder knight?"  
"I know not, sir."  
"O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!"  
"It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night"  
"Like a rich jewel in an Ethiope's ear,"  
"Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!"  
"So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows,"  
"As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows."  
"The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand,"  
"And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand."  
"Did my heart love till now? forswear it, sight!"  
"For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night."  
"This, by his voice, should be a Montague."  
"Fetch me my rapier, boy. What dares the slave"  
"Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,"  
"To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?"  
"Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,"  
"To strike him dead, I hold it not a sin."  
"Why, how now, kinsman! wherefore storm you so?"  
"Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe,"  
"A villain that is hither come in spite,"  
"To scorn at our solemnity this night."  
"Young Romeo is it?"  
"'Tis he, that villain Romeo."  
"Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone,"  
"He bears him like a portly gentleman,"  
"And, to say truth, Verona brags of him"  
"To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth:"  
"I would not for the wealth of all the town"  
"Here in my house do him disparagement:"  
"Therefore be patient, take no note of him:"  
"It is my will, the which if thou respect,"  
"Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,"  
"And ill-beseeming semblance for a feast."  
"It fits, when such a villain is a guest:"  
"I'll not endure him."  
"He shall be endured:"  
"What, goodman boy! I say, he shall: go to,"  
"Am I the master here, or you? go to."  
"You'll not endure him! God shall mend my soul!"  
"You'll make a mutiny among my guests!"  
"You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!"  
"Why, uncle, 'tis a shame."  
"Go to, go to,"  
"You are a saucy boy: is't so, indeed?"  
"This trick may chance to scathe you, I know what:"  
"You must contrary me! marry, 'tis time."  
"Well said, my hearts! You are a princox, go:"  
"Be quiet, or--More light, more light! For shame!"  
"I'll make you quiet. What, cheerly, my hearts!"  
"Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting"  
"Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting."  
"I will withdraw: but this intrusion shall"  
"Now seeming sweet convert to bitter gall."  
Exit  
"[To JULIET]  If I profane with my unworthiest hand"  
"This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:"  
"My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand"  
"To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss."  
"Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,"  
"Which mannerly devotion shows in this,"  
"For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,"  
"And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss."  
"Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?"  
"Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer."  
"O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do,"  
"They pray, grant thou, lest faith turn to despair."  
"Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake."  
"Then move not, while my prayer's effect I take."  
"Thus from my lips, by yours, my sin is purged."  
"Then have my lips the sin that they have took."  
"Sin from thy lips? O trespass sweetly urged!"  
"Give me my sin again."  
"You kiss by the book."  
"Madam, your mother craves a word with you."  
"What is her mother?"  
"Marry, bachelor,"  
"Her mother is the lady of the house,"  
"And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous"  
"I nursed her daughter, that you talk'd withal,"  
"I tell you, he that can lay hold of her"  
"Shall have the chinks."  
"Is she a Capulet?"  
"O dear account! my life is my foe's debt."  
"Away, begone, the sport is at the best."  
"Ay, so I fear, the more is my unrest."  
"Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone,"  
"We have a trifling foolish banquet towards."  
"Is it e'en so? why, then, I thank you all"  
"I thank you, honest gentlemen, good night."  
"More torches here! Come on then, let's to bed."  
"Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late:"  
"I'll to my rest."  
"Exeunt all but JULIET and Nurse"  
"Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?"  
"The son and heir of old Tiberio."  
"What's he that now is going out of door?"  
"Marry, that, I think, be young Petrucio."  
"What's he that follows there, that would not dance?"  
"I know not."  
"Go ask his name: if he be married."  
"My grave is like to be my wedding bed."  
"His name is Romeo, and a Montague,"  
"The only son of your great enemy."  
"My only love sprung from my only hate!"  
"Too early seen unknown, and known too late!"  
"Prodigious birth of love it is to me,"  
"That I must love a loathed enemy."  
"What's this? what's this?"  
"A rhyme I learn'd even now"  
"Of one I danced withal."  
"One calls within 'Juliet.'"  
"Anon, anon!"  
"Come, let's away, the strangers all are gone."  
Exeunt  
"ACT II"  
PROLOGUE  
"Enter Chorus"  
"Now old desire doth in his death-bed lie,"  
"And young affection gapes to be his heir,"  
"That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,"  
"With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair."  
"Now Romeo is beloved and loves again,"  
"Alike betwitched by the charm of looks,"  
"But to his foe supposed he must complain,"  
"And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks:"  
"Being held a foe, he may not have access"  
"To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,"  
"And she as much in love, her means much less"  
"To meet her new-beloved any where:"  
"But passion lends them power, time means, to meet"  
"Tempering extremities with extreme sweet."  
Exit  
"SCENE I. A lane by the wall of Capulet's orchard."  
"Enter ROMEO"  
"Can I go forward when my heart is here?"  
"Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out."  
"He climbs the wall, and leaps down within it"  
"Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO"  
"Romeo! my cousin Romeo!"  
"He is wise,"  
"And, on my lie, hath stol'n him home to bed."  
"He ran this way, and leap'd this orchard wall:"  
"Call, good Mercutio."  
"Nay, I'll conjure too."  
"Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!"  
"Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh:"  
"Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied,"  
"Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove,'"  
"Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,"  
"One nick-name for her purblind son and heir,"  
"Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim,"  
"When King Cophetua loved the beggar-maid!"  
"He heareth not, he stirreth not, he moveth not,"  
"The ape is dead, and I must conjure him."  
"I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes,"  
"By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,"  
"By her fine foot, straight leg and quivering thigh"  
"And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,"  
"That in thy likeness thou appear to us!"  
"And if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him."  
"This cannot anger him: 'twould anger him"  
"To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle"  
"Of some strange nature, letting it there stand"  
"Till she had laid it and conjured it down,"  
"That were some spite: my invocation"  
"Is fair and honest, and in his mistres s' name"  
"I conjure only but to raise up him."  
"Come, he hath hid himself among these trees,"  
"To be consorted with the humorous night:"  
"Blind is his love and best befits the dark."  
"If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark."  
"Now will he sit under a medlar tree,"  
"And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit"  
"As maids call medlars, when they laugh alone."  
"Romeo, that she were, O, that she were"  
"An open et caetera, thou a poperin pear!"  
"Romeo, good night: I'll to my truckle-bed,"  
"This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep:"  
"Come, shall we go?"  
"Go, then, for 'tis in vain"  
"To seek him here that means not to be found."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. Capulet's orchard."  
"Enter ROMEO"  
"He jests at scars that never felt a wound."  
"JULIET appears above at a window"  
"But, soft! what light through yonder window breaks?"  
"It is the east, and Juliet is the sun."  
"Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,"  
"Who is already sick and pale with grief,"  
"That thou her maid art far more fair than she:"  
"Be not her maid, since she is envious,"  
"Her vestal livery is but sick and green"  
"And none but fools do wear it, cast it off."  
"It is my lady, O, it is my love!"  
"O, that she knew she were!"  
"She speaks yet she says nothing: what of that?"  
"Her eye discourses, I will answer it."  
"I am too bold, 'tis not to me she speaks:"  
"Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,"  
"Having some business, do entreat her eyes"  
"To twinkle in their spheres till they return."  
"What if her eyes were there, they in her head?"  
"The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars,"  
"As daylight doth a lamp, her eyes in heaven"  
"Would through the airy region stream so bright"  
"That birds would sing and think it were not night."  
"See, how she leans her cheek upon her hand!"  
"O, that I were a glove upon that hand,"  
"That I might touch that cheek!"  
"Ay me!"  
"She speaks:"  
"O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art"  
"As glorious to this night, being o'er my head"  
"As is a winged messenger of heaven"  
"Unto the white-upturned wondering eyes"  
"Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him"  
"When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds"  
"And sails upon the bosom of the air."  
"O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?"  
"Deny thy father and refuse thy name,"  
"Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,"  
"And I'll no longer be a Capulet."  
"[Aside]  Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?"  
"'Tis but thy name that is my enemy,"  
"Thou art thyself, though not a Montague."  
"What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,"  
"Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part"  
"Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!"  
"What's in a name? that which we call a rose"  
"By any other name would smell as sweet,"  
"So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,"  
"Retain that dear perfection which he owes"  
"Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name,"  
"And for that name which is no part of thee"  
"Take all myself."  
"I take thee at thy word:"  
"Call me but love, and I'll be new baptized,"  
"Henceforth I never will be Romeo."  
"What man art thou that thus bescreen'd in night"  
"So stumblest on my counsel?"  
"By a name"  
"I know not how to tell thee who I am:"  
"My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,"  
"Because it is an enemy to thee,"  
"Had I it written, I would tear the word."  
"My ears have not yet drunk a hundred words"  
"Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound:"  
"Art thou not Romeo and a Montague?"  
"Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike."  
"How camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?"  
"The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,"  
"And the place death, considering who thou art,"  
"If any of my kinsmen find thee here."  
"With love's light wings did I o'er-perch these walls,"  
"For stony limits cannot hold love out,"  
"And what love can do that dares love attempt,"  
"Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me."  
"If they do see thee, they will murder thee."  
"Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye"  
"Than twenty of their swords: look thou but sweet,"  
"And I am proof against their enmity."  
"I would not for the world they saw thee here."  
"I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight,"  
"And but thou love me, let them find me here:"  
"My life were better ended by their hate,"  
"Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love."  
"By whose direction found'st thou out this place?"  
"By love, who first did prompt me to inquire,"  
"He lent me counsel and I lent him eyes."  
"I am no pilot, yet, wert thou as far"  
"As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,"  
"I would adventure for such merchandise."  
"Thou know'st the mask of night is on my face,"  
"Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek"  
"For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night"  
"Fain would I dwell on form, fain, fain deny"  
"What I have spoke: but farewell compliment!"  
"Dost thou love me? I know thou wilt say 'Ay,'"  
"And I will take thy word: yet if thou swear'st,"  
"Thou mayst prove false, at lovers' perjuries"  
"Then say, Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,"  
"If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully:"  
"Or if thou think'st I am too quickly won,"  
"I'll frown and be perverse an say thee nay,"  
"So thou wilt woo, but else, not for the world."  
"In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,"  
"And therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light:"  
"But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true"  
"Than those that have more cunning to be strange."  
"I should have been more strange, I must confess,"  
"But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,"  
"My true love's passion: therefore pardon me,"  
"And not impute this yielding to light love,"  
"Which the dark night hath so discovered."  
"Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear"  
"That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops--"  
"O, swear not by the moon, the inconstant moon,"  
"That monthly changes in her circled orb,"  
"Lest that thy love prove likewise variable."  
"What shall I swear by?"  
"Do not swear at all,"  
"Or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,"  
"Which is the god of my idolatry,"  
"And I'll believe thee."  
"If my heart's dear love--"  
"Well, do not swear: although I joy in thee,"  
"I have no joy of this contract to-night:"  
"It is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden,"  
"Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be"  
"Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!"  
"This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,"  
"May prove a beauteous flower when next we meet."  
"Good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest"  
"Come to thy heart as that within my breast!"  
"O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?"  
"What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?"  
"The exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine."  
"I gave thee mine before thou didst request it:"  
"And yet I would it were to give again."  
"Wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?"  
"But to be frank, and give it thee again."  
"And yet I wish but for the thing I have:"  
"My bounty is as boundless as the sea,"  
"My love as deep, the more I give to thee,"  
"The more I have, for both are infinite."  
"Nurse calls within"  
"I hear some noise within, dear love, adieu!"  
"Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true."  
"Stay but a little, I will come again."  
"Exit, above"  
"O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard."  
"Being in night, all this is but a dream,"  
"Too flattering-sweet to be substantial."  
"Re-enter JULIET, above"  
"Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed."  
"If that thy bent of love be honourable,"  
"Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,"  
"By one that I'll procure to come to thee,"  
"Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite,"  
"And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay"  
"And follow thee my lord throughout the world."  
"[Within]  Madam!"  
"I come, anon.--But if thou mean'st not well,"  
"I do beseech thee--"  
"[Within]  Madam!"  
"By and by, I come:--"  
"To cease thy suit, and leave me to my grief:"  
"To-morrow will I send."  
"So thrive my soul--"  
"A thousand times good night!"  
"Exit, above"  
"A thousand times the worse, to want thy light."  
"Love goes toward love, as schoolboys from"  
"their books,"  
"But love from love, toward school with heavy looks."  
Retiring  
"Re-enter JULIET, above"  
"Hist! Romeo, hist! O, for a falconer's voice,"  
"To lure this tassel-gentle back again!"  
"Bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud,"  
"Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,"  
"And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine,"  
"With repetition of my Romeo's name."  
"It is my soul that calls upon my name:"  
"How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,"  
"Like softest music to attending ears!"  
Romeo!  
"My dear?"  
"At what o'clock to-morrow"  
"Shall I send to thee?"  
"At the hour of nine."  
"I will not fail: 'tis twenty years till then."  
"I have forgot why I did call thee back."  
"Let me stand here till thou remember it."  
"I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,"  
"Remembering how I love thy company."  
"And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,"  
"Forgetting any other home but this."  
"'Tis almost morning, I would have thee gone:"  
"And yet no further than a wanton's bird,"  
"Who lets it hop a little from her hand,"  
"Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,"  
"And with a silk thread plucks it back again,"  
"So loving-jealous of his liberty."  
"I would I were thy bird."  
"Sweet, so would I:"  
"Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing."  
"Good night, good night! parting is such"  
"sweet sorrow,"  
"That I shall say good night till it be morrow."  
"Exit above"  
"Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!"  
"Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!"  
"Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,"  
"His help to crave, and my dear hap to tell."  
Exit  
"SCENE III. Friar Laurence's cell."  
"Enter FRIAR LAURENCE, with a basket"  
"The grey-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night,"  
"Chequering the eastern clouds with streaks of light,"  
"And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels"  
"From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels:"  
"Now, ere the sun advance his burning eye,"  
"The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,"  
"I must up-fill this osier cage of ours"  
"With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers."  
"The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb,"  
"What is her burying grave that is her womb,"  
"And from her womb children of divers kind"  
"We sucking on her natural bosom find,"  
"Many for many virtues excellent,"  
"None but for some and yet all different."  
"O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies"  
"In herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities:"  
"For nought so vile that on the earth doth live"  
"But to the earth some special good doth give,"  
"Nor aught so good but strain'd from that fair use"  
"Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse:"  
"Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,"  
"And vice sometimes by action dignified."  
"Within the infant rind of this small flower"  
"Poison hath residence and medicine power:"  
"For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part,"  
"Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart."  
"Two such opposed kings encamp them still"  
"In man as well as herbs, grace and rude will,"  
"And where the worser is predominant,"  
"Full soon the canker death eats up that plant."  
"Enter ROMEO"  
"Good morrow, father."  
Benedicite!  
"What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?"  
"Young son, it argues a distemper'd head"  
"So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed:"  
"Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,"  
"And where care lodges, sleep will never lie,"  
"But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain"  
"Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign:"  
"Therefore thy earliness doth me assure"  
"Thou art up-roused by some distemperature,"  
"Or if not so, then here I hit it right,"  
"Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night."  
"That last is true, the sweeter rest was mine."  
"God pardon sin! wast thou with Rosaline?"  
"With Rosaline, my ghostly father? no,"  
"I have forgot that name, and that name's woe."  
"That's my good son: but where hast thou been, then?"  
"I'll tell thee, ere thou ask it me again."  
"I have been feasting with mine enemy,"  
"Where on a sudden one hath wounded me,"  
"That's by me wounded: both our remedies"  
"Within thy help and holy physic lies:"  
"I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,"  
"My intercession likewise steads my foe."  
"Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift,"  
"Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift."  
"Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set"  
"On the fair daughter of rich Capulet:"  
"As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,"  
"And all combined, save what thou must combine"  
"By holy marriage: when and where and how"  
"We met, we woo'd and made exchange of vow,"  
"I'll tell thee as we pass, but this I pray,"  
"That thou consent to marry us to-day."  
"Holy Saint Francis, what a change is here!"  
"Is Rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear,"  
"So soon forsaken? young men's love then lies"  
"Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes."  
"Jesu Maria, what a deal of brine"  
"Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!"  
"How much salt water thrown away in waste,"  
"To season love, that of it doth not taste!"  
"The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,"  
"Thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears,"  
"Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit"  
"Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet:"  
"If e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine,"  
"Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline:"  
"And art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then,"  
"Women may fall, when there's no strength in men."  
"Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline."  
"For doting, not for loving, pupil mine."  
"And bad'st me bury love."  
"Not in a grave,"  
"To lay one in, another out to have."  
"I pray thee, chide not, she whom I love now"  
"Doth grace for grace and love for love allow,"  
"The other did not so."  
"O, she knew well"  
"Thy love did read by rote and could not spell."  
"But come, young waverer, come, go with me,"  
"In one respect I'll thy assistant be,"  
"For this alliance may so happy prove,"  
"To turn your households' rancour to pure love."  
"O, let us hence, I stand on sudden haste."  
"Wisely and slow, they stumble that run fast."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE IV. A street."  
"Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO"  
"Where the devil should this Romeo be?"  
"Came he not home to-night?"  
"Not to his father's, I spoke with his man."  
"Ah, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline."  
"Torments him so, that he will sure run mad."  
"Tybalt, the kinsman of old Capulet,"  
"Hath sent a letter to his father's house."  
"A challenge, on my life."  
"Romeo will answer it."  
"Any man that can write may answer a letter."  
"Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he"  
"dares, being dared."  
"Alas poor Romeo! he is already dead, stabbed with a"  
"white wench's black eye, shot through the ear with a"  
"love-song, the very pin of his heart cleft with the"  
"blind bow-boy's butt-shaft: and is he a man to"  
"encounter Tybalt?"  
"Why, what is Tybalt?"  
"More than prince of cats, I can tell you. O, he is"  
"the courageous captain of compliments. He fights as"  
"you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and"  
"proportion, rests me his minim rest, one, two, and"  
"the third in your bosom: the very butcher of a silk"  
"button, a duellist, a duellist, a gentleman of the"  
"very first house, of the first and second cause:"  
"ah, the immortal passado! the punto reverso! the"  
hai!  
"The what?"  
"The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting"  
"fantasticoes, these new tuners of accents! 'By Jesu,"  
"a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good"  
"whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,"  
"grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with"  
"these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these"  
"perdona-mi's, who stand so much on the new form,"  
"that they cannot at ease on the old bench? O, their"  
"bones, their bones!"  
"Enter ROMEO"  
"Here comes Romeo, here comes Romeo."  
"Without his roe, like a dried herring: flesh, flesh,"  
"how art thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers"  
"that Petrarch flowed in: Laura to his lady was but a"  
"kitchen-wench, marry, she had a better love to"  
"be-rhyme her, Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gipsy,"  
"Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, Thisbe a grey"  
"eye or so, but not to the purpose. Signior"  
"Romeo, bon jour! there's a French salutation"  
"to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit"  
"fairly last night."  
"Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?"  
"The ship, sir, the slip, can you not conceive?"  
"Pardon, good Mercutio, my business was great, and in"  
"such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy."  
"That's as much as to say, such a case as yours"  
"constrains a man to bow in the hams."  
"Meaning, to court'sy."  
"Thou hast most kindly hit it."  
"A most courteous exposition."  
"Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy."  
"Pink for flower."  
Right.  
"Why, then is my pump well flowered."  
"Well said: follow me this jest now till thou hast"  
"worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it"  
"is worn, the jest may remain after the wearing sole singular."  
"O single-soled jest, solely singular for the"  
singleness.  
"Come between us, good Benvolio, my wits faint."  
"Switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or I'll cry a match."  
"Nay, if thy wits run the wild-goose chase, I have"  
"done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of"  
"thy wits than, I am sure, I have in my whole five:"  
"was I with you there for the goose?"  
"Thou wast never with me for any thing when thou wast"  
"not there for the goose."  
"I will bite thee by the ear for that jest."  
"Nay, good goose, bite not."  
"Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting, it is a most"  
"sharp sauce."  
"And is it not well served in to a sweet goose?"  
"O here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an"  
"inch narrow to an ell broad!"  
"I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which added"  
"to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose."  
"Why, is not this better now than groaning for love?"  
"now art thou sociable, now art thou Romeo, now art"  
"thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature:"  
"for this drivelling love is like a great natural,"  
"that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole."  
"Stop there, stop there."  
"Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair."  
"Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large."  
"O, thou art deceived, I would have made it short:"  
"for I was come to the whole depth of my tale, and"  
"meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer."  
"Here's goodly gear!"  
"Enter Nurse and PETER"  
"A sail, a sail!"  
"Two, two, a shirt and a smock."  
Peter!  
Anon!  
"My fan, Peter."  
"Good Peter, to hide her face, for her fan's the"  
"fairer face."  
"God ye good morrow, gentlemen."  
"God ye good den, fair gentlewoman."  
"Is it good den?"  
"'Tis no less, I tell you, for the bawdy hand of the"  
"dial is now upon the prick of noon."  
"Out upon you! what a man are you!"  
"One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to"  
mar.  
"By my troth, it is well said, 'for himself to mar,'"  
"quoth a'? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I"  
"may find the young Romeo?"  
"I can tell you, but young Romeo will be older when"  
"you have found him than he was when you sought him:"  
"I am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse."  
"You say well."  
"Yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith,"  
"wisely, wisely."  
"if you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with"  
you.  
"She will indite him to some supper."  
"A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho!"  
"What hast thou found?"  
"No hare, sir, unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie,"  
"that is something stale and hoar ere it be spent."  
Sings  
"An old hare hoar,"  
"And an old hare hoar,"  
"Is very good meat in lent"  
"But a hare that is hoar"  
"Is too much for a score,"  
"When it hoars ere it be spent."  
"Romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll"  
"to dinner, thither."  
"I will follow you."  
"Farewell, ancient lady, farewell,"  
Singing  
"'lady, lady, lady.'"  
"Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO"  
"Marry, farewell! I pray you, sir, what saucy"  
"merchant was this, that was so full of his ropery?"  
"A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk,"  
"and will speak more in a minute than he will stand"  
"to in a month."  
"An a' speak any thing against me, I'll take him"  
"down, an a' were lustier than he is, and twenty such"  
"Jacks, and if I cannot, I'll find those that shall."  
"Scurvy knave! I am none of his flirt-gills, I am"  
"none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand by"  
"too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?"  
"I saw no man use you a pleasure, if I had, my weapon"  
"should quickly have been out, I warrant you: I dare"  
"draw as soon as another man, if I see occasion in a"  
"good quarrel, and the law on my side."  
"Now, afore God, I am so vexed, that every part about"  
"me quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word:"  
"and as I told you, my young lady bade me inquire you"  
"out, what she bade me say, I will keep to myself:"  
"but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into"  
"a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross"  
"kind of behavior, as they say: for the gentlewoman"  
"is young, and, therefore, if you should deal double"  
"with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered"  
"to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing."  
"Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I"  
"protest unto thee--"  
"Good heart, and, i' faith, I will tell her as much:"  
"Lord, Lord, she will be a joyful woman."  
"What wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me."  
"I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as"  
"I take it, is a gentlemanlike offer."  
"Bid her devise"  
"Some means to come to shrift this afternoon,"  
"And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell"  
"Be shrived and married. Here is for thy pains."  
"No truly sir, not a penny."  
"Go to, I say you shall."  
"This afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there."  
"And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall:"  
"Within this hour my man shall be with thee"  
"And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,"  
"Which to the high top-gallant of my joy"  
"Must be my convoy in the secret night."  
"Farewell, be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains:"  
"Farewell, commend me to thy mistress."  
"Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir."  
"What say'st thou, my dear nurse?"  
"Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,"  
"Two may keep counsel, putting one away?"  
"I warrant thee, my man's as true as steel."  
"Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady--Lord,"  
"Lord! when 'twas a little prating thing:--O, there"  
"is a nobleman in town, one Paris, that would fain"  
"lay knife aboard, but she, good soul, had as lief"  
"see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger her"  
"sometimes and tell her that Paris is the properer"  
"man, but, I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks"  
"as pale as any clout in the versal world. Doth not"  
"rosemary and Romeo begin both with a letter?"  
"Ay, nurse, what of that? both with an R."  
"Ah. mocker! that's the dog's name, R is for"  
"the--No, I know it begins with some other"  
"letter:--and she hath the prettiest sententious of"  
"it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good"  
"to hear it."  
"Commend me to thy lady."  
"Ay, a thousand times."  
"Exit Romeo"  
Peter!  
Anon!  
"Peter, take my fan, and go before and apace."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE V. Capulet's orchard."  
"Enter JULIET"  
"The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse,"  
"In half an hour she promised to return."  
"Perchance she cannot meet him: that's not so."  
"O, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts,"  
"Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams,"  
"Driving back shadows over louring hills:"  
"Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw love,"  
"And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings."  
"Now is the sun upon the highmost hill"  
"Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve"  
"Is three long hours, yet she is not come."  
"Had she affections and warm youthful blood,"  
"She would be as swift in motion as a ball,"  
"My words would bandy her to my sweet love,"  
"And his to me:"  
"But old folks, many feign as they were dead,"  
"Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead."  
"O God, she comes!"  
"Enter Nurse and PETER"  
"O honey nurse, what news?"  
"Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away."  
"Peter, stay at the gate."  
"Exit PETER"  
"Now, good sweet nurse,--O Lord, why look'st thou sad?"  
"Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily,"  
"If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news"  
"By playing it to me with so sour a face."  
"I am a-weary, give me leave awhile:"  
"Fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have I had!"  
"I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news:"  
"Nay, come, I pray thee, speak, good, good nurse, speak."  
"Jesu, what haste? can you not stay awhile?"  
"Do you not see that I am out of breath?"  
"How art thou out of breath, when thou hast breath"  
"To say to me that thou art out of breath?"  
"The excuse that thou dost make in this delay"  
"Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse."  
"Is thy news good, or bad? answer to that,"  
"Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance:"  
"Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?"  
"Well, you have made a simple choice, you know not"  
"how to choose a man: Romeo! no, not he, though his"  
"face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels"  
"all men's, and for a hand, and a foot, and a body,"  
"though they be not to be talked on, yet they are"  
"past compare: he is not the flower of courtesy,"  
"but, I'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy"  
"ways, wench, serve God. What, have you dined at home?"  
"No, no: but all this did I know before."  
"What says he of our marriage? what of that?"  
"Lord, how my head aches! what a head have I!"  
"It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces."  
"My back o' t' other side,--O, my back, my back!"  
"Beshrew your heart for sending me about,"  
"To catch my death with jaunting up and down!"  
"I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well."  
"Sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?"  
"Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a"  
"courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, I"  
"warrant, a virtuous,--Where is your mother?"  
"Where is my mother! why, she is within,"  
"Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!"  
"'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,"  
"Where is your mother?'"  
"O God's lady dear!"  
"Are you so hot? marry, come up, I trow,"  
"Is this the poultice for my aching bones?"  
"Henceforward do your messages yourself."  
"Here's such a coil! come, what says Romeo?"  
"Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?"  
"I have."  
"Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell,"  
"There stays a husband to make you a wife:"  
"Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks,"  
"They'll be in scarlet straight at any news."  
"Hie you to church, I must another way,"  
"To fetch a ladder, by the which your love"  
"Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark:"  
"I am the drudge and toil in your delight,"  
"But you shall bear the burden soon at night."  
"Go, I'll to dinner: hie you to the cell."  
"Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE VI. Friar Laurence's cell."  
"Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and ROMEO"  
"So smile the heavens upon this holy act,"  
"That after hours with sorrow chide us not!"  
"Amen, amen! but come what sorrow can,"  
"It cannot countervail the exchange of joy"  
"That one short minute gives me in her sight:"  
"Do thou but close our hands with holy words,"  
"Then love-devouring death do what he dare,"  
"It is enough I may but call her mine."  
"These violent delights have violent ends"  
"And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,"  
"Which as they kiss consume: the sweetest honey"  
"Is loathsome in his own deliciousness"  
"And in the taste confounds the appetite:"  
"Therefore love moderately, long love doth so,"  
"Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow."  
"Enter JULIET"  
"Here comes the lady: O, so light a foot"  
"Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint:"  
"A lover may bestride the gossamer"  
"That idles in the wanton summer air,"  
"And yet not fall, so light is vanity."  
"Good even to my ghostly confessor."  
"Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both."  
"As much to him, else is his thanks too much."  
"Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy"  
"Be heap'd like mine and that thy skill be more"  
"To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath"  
"This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue"  
"Unfold the imagined happiness that both"  
"Receive in either by this dear encounter."  
"Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,"  
"Brags of his substance, not of ornament:"  
"They are but beggars that can count their worth,"  
"But my true love is grown to such excess"  
"I cannot sum up sum of half my wealth."  
"Come, come with me, and we will make short work,"  
"For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone"  
"Till holy church incorporate two in one."  
Exeunt  
"ACT III"  
"SCENE I. A public place."  
"Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO, Page, and Servants"  
"I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire:"  
"The day is hot, the Capulets abroad,"  
"And, if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,"  
"For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring."  
"Thou art like one of those fellows that when he"  
"enters the confines of a tavern claps me his sword"  
"upon the table and says 'God send me no need of"  
"thee!' and by the operation of the second cup draws"  
"it on the drawer, when indeed there is no need."  
"Am I like such a fellow?"  
"Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood as"  
"any in Italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as"  
"soon moody to be moved."  
"And what to?"  
"Nay, an there were two such, we should have none"  
"shortly, for one would kill the other. Thou! why,"  
"thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more,"  
"or a hair less, in his beard, than thou hast: thou"  
"wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no"  
"other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes: what"  
"eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel?"  
"Thy head is as fun of quarrels as an egg is full of"  
"meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as"  
"an egg for quarrelling: thou hast quarrelled with a"  
"man for coughing in the street, because he hath"  
"wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun:"  
"didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing"  
"his new doublet before Easter? with another, for"  
"tying his new shoes with old riband? and yet thou"  
"wilt tutor me from quarrelling!"  
"An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man"  
"should buy the fee-simple of my life for an hour and a quarter."  
"The fee-simple! O simple!"  
"By my head, here come the Capulets."  
"By my heel, I care not."  
"Enter TYBALT and others"  
"Follow me close, for I will speak to them."  
"Gentlemen, good den: a word with one of you."  
"And but one word with one of us? couple it with"  
"something, make it a word and a blow."  
"You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you"  
"will give me occasion."  
"Could you not take some occasion without giving?"  
"Mercutio, thou consort'st with Romeo,--"  
"Consort! what, dost thou make us minstrels? an"  
"thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but"  
"discords: here's my fiddlestick, here's that shall"  
"make you dance. 'Zounds, consort!"  
"We talk here in the public haunt of men:"  
"Either withdraw unto some private place,"  
"And reason coldly of your grievances,"  
"Or else depart, here all eyes gaze on us."  
"Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze,"  
"I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I."  
"Enter ROMEO"  
"Well, peace be with you, sir: here comes my man."  
"But I'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery:"  
"Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower,"  
"Your worship in that sense may call him 'man.'"  
"Romeo, the hate I bear thee can afford"  
"No better term than this,--thou art a villain."  
"Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee"  
"Doth much excuse the appertaining rage"  
"To such a greeting: villain am I none,"  
"Therefore farewell, I see thou know'st me not."  
"Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries"  
"That thou hast done me, therefore turn and draw."  
"I do protest, I never injured thee,"  
"But love thee better than thou canst devise,"  
"Till thou shalt know the reason of my love:"  
"And so, good Capulet,--which name I tender"  
"As dearly as my own,--be satisfied."  
"O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!"  
"Alla stoccata carries it away."  
Draws  
"Tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you walk?"  
"What wouldst thou have with me?"  
"Good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine"  
"lives, that I mean to make bold withal, and as you"  
"shall use me hereafter, drybeat the rest of the"  
"eight. Will you pluck your sword out of his pitcher"  
"by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your"  
"ears ere it be out."  
"I am for you."  
Drawing  
"Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up."  
"Come, sir, your passado."  
"They fight"  
"Draw, Benvolio, beat down their weapons."  
"Gentlemen, for shame, forbear this outrage!"  
"Tybalt, Mercutio, the prince expressly hath"  
"Forbidden bandying in Verona streets:"  
"Hold, Tybalt! good Mercutio!"  
"TYBALT under ROMEO's arm stabs MERCUTIO, and flies with his followers"  
"I am hurt."  
"A plague o' both your houses! I am sped."  
"Is he gone, and hath nothing?"  
"What, art thou hurt?"  
"Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch, marry, 'tis enough."  
"Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon."  
"Exit Page"  
"Courage, man, the hurt cannot be much."  
"No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a"  
"church-door, but 'tis enough,'twill serve: ask for"  
"me to-morrow, and you shall find me a grave man. I"  
"am peppered, I warrant, for this world. A plague o'"  
"both your houses! 'Zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a"  
"cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a"  
"rogue, a villain, that fights by the book of"  
"arithmetic! Why the devil came you between us? I"  
"was hurt under your arm."  
"I thought all for the best."  
"Help me into some house, Benvolio,"  
"Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!"  
"They have made worms' meat of me: I have it,"  
"And soundly too: your houses!"  
"Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO"  
"This gentleman, the prince's near ally,"  
"My very friend, hath got his mortal hurt"  
"In my behalf, my reputation stain'd"  
"With Tybalt's slander,--Tybalt, that an hour"  
"Hath been my kinsman! O sweet Juliet,"  
"Thy beauty hath made me effeminate"  
"And in my temper soften'd valour's steel!"  
"Re-enter BENVOLIO"  
"O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!"  
"That gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,"  
"Which too untimely here did scorn the earth."  
"This day's black fate on more days doth depend,"  
"This but begins the woe, others must end."  
"Here comes the furious Tybalt back again."  
"Alive, in triumph! and Mercutio slain!"  
"Away to heaven, respective lenity,"  
"And fire-eyed fury be my conduct now!"  
"Re-enter TYBALT"  
"Now, Tybalt, take the villain back again,"  
"That late thou gavest me, for Mercutio's soul"  
"Is but a little way above our heads,"  
"Staying for thine to keep him company:"  
"Either thou, or I, or both, must go with him."  
"Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,"  
"Shalt with him hence."  
"This shall determine that."  
"They fight, TYBALT falls"  
"Romeo, away, be gone!"  
"The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain."  
"Stand not amazed: the prince will doom thee death,"  
"If thou art taken: hence, be gone, away!"  
"O, I am fortune's fool!"  
"Why dost thou stay?"  
"Exit ROMEO"  
"Enter Citizens,  and c"  
"Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?"  
"Tybalt, that murderer, which way ran he?"  
"There lies that Tybalt."  
"Up, sir, go with me,"  
"I charge thee in the princes name, obey."  
"Enter Prince, attended, MONTAGUE, CAPULET, their Wives, and others"  
"Where are the vile beginners of this fray?"  
"O noble prince, I can discover all"  
"The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl:"  
"There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,"  
"That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio."  
"Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!"  
"O prince! O cousin! husband! O, the blood is spilt"  
"O my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,"  
"For blood of ours, shed blood of Montague."  
"O cousin, cousin!"  
"Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?"  
"Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did slay,"  
"Romeo that spoke him fair, bade him bethink"  
"How nice the quarrel was, and urged withal"  
"Your high displeasure: all this uttered"  
"With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd,"  
"Could not take truce with the unruly spleen"  
"Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts"  
"With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast,"  
"Who all as hot, turns deadly point to point,"  
"And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats"  
"Cold death aside, and with the other sends"  
"It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity,"  
"Retorts it: Romeo he cries aloud,"  
"'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and, swifter than"  
"his tongue,"  
"His agile arm beats down their fatal points,"  
"And 'twixt them rushes, underneath whose arm"  
"An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life"  
"Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled,"  
"But by and by comes back to Romeo,"  
"Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,"  
"And to 't they go like lightning, for, ere I"  
"Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain."  
"And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly."  
"This is the truth, or let Benvolio die."  
"He is a kinsman to the Montague,"  
"Affection makes him false, he speaks not true:"  
"Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,"  
"And all those twenty could but kill one life."  
"I beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give,"  
"Romeo slew Tybalt, Romeo must not live."  
"Romeo slew him, he slew Mercutio,"  
"Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?"  
"Not Romeo, prince, he was Mercutio's friend,"  
"His fault concludes but what the law should end,"  
"The life of Tybalt."  
"And for that offence"  
"Immediately we do exile him hence:"  
"I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,"  
"My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding,"  
"But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine"  
"That you shall all repent the loss of mine:"  
"I will be deaf to pleading and excuses,"  
"Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses:"  
"Therefore use none: let Romeo hence in haste,"  
"Else, when he's found, that hour is his last."  
"Bear hence this body and attend our will:"  
"Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. Capulet's orchard."  
"Enter JULIET"  
"Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,"  
"Towards Phoebus' lodging: such a wagoner"  
"As Phaethon would whip you to the west,"  
"And bring in cloudy night immediately."  
"Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,"  
"That runaway's eyes may wink and Romeo"  
"Leap to these arms, untalk'd of and unseen."  
"Lovers can see to do their amorous rites"  
"By their own beauties, or, if love be blind,"  
"It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,"  
"Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,"  
"And learn me how to lose a winning match,"  
"Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods:"  
"Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,"  
"With thy black mantle, till strange love, grown bold,"  
"Think true love acted simple modesty."  
"Come, night, come, Romeo, come, thou day in night,"  
"For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night"  
"Whiter than new snow on a raven's back."  
"Come, gentle night, come, loving, black-brow'd night,"  
"Give me my Romeo, and, when he shall die,"  
"Take him and cut him out in little stars,"  
"And he will make the face of heaven so fine"  
"That all the world will be in love with night"  
"And pay no worship to the garish sun."  
"O, I have bought the mansion of a love,"  
"But not possess'd it, and, though I am sold,"  
"Not yet enjoy'd: so tedious is this day"  
"As is the night before some festival"  
"To an impatient child that hath new robes"  
"And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,"  
"And she brings news, and every tongue that speaks"  
"But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence."  
"Enter Nurse, with cords"  
"Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords"  
"That Romeo bid thee fetch?"  
"Ay, ay, the cords."  
"Throws them down"  
"Ay me! what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?"  
"Ah, well-a-day! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!"  
"We are undone, lady, we are undone!"  
"Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!"  
"Can heaven be so envious?"  
"Romeo can,"  
"Though heaven cannot: O Romeo, Romeo!"  
"Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!"  
"What devil art thou, that dost torment me thus?"  
"This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell."  
"Hath Romeo slain himself? say thou but 'I,'"  
"And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more"  
"Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice:"  
"I am not I, if there be such an I,"  
"Or those eyes shut, that make thee answer 'I.'"  
"If he be slain, say 'I', or if not, no:"  
"Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe."  
"I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,--"  
"God save the mark!--here on his manly breast:"  
"A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse,"  
"Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,"  
"All in gore-blood, I swounded at the sight."  
"O, break, my heart! poor bankrupt, break at once!"  
"To prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty!"  
"Vile earth, to earth resign, end motion here,"  
"And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!"  
"O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!"  
"O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman!"  
"That ever I should live to see thee dead!"  
"What storm is this that blows so contrary?"  
"Is Romeo slaughter'd, and is Tybalt dead?"  
"My dear-loved cousin, and my dearer lord?"  
"Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!"  
"For who is living, if those two are gone?"  
"Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished,"  
"Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished."  
"O God! did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?"  
"It did, it did, alas the day, it did!"  
"O serpent heart, hid with a flowering face!"  
"Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?"  
"Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!"  
"Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!"  
"Despised substance of divinest show!"  
"Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st,"  
"A damned saint, an honourable villain!"  
"O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell,"  
"When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend"  
"In moral paradise of such sweet flesh?"  
"Was ever book containing such vile matter"  
"So fairly bound? O that deceit should dwell"  
"In such a gorgeous palace!"  
"There's no trust,"  
"No faith, no honesty in men, all perjured,"  
"All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers."  
"Ah, where's my man? give me some aqua vitae:"  
"These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old."  
"Shame come to Romeo!"  
"Blister'd be thy tongue"  
"For such a wish! he was not born to shame:"  
"Upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit,"  
"For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd"  
"Sole monarch of the universal earth."  
"O, what a beast was I to chide at him!"  
"Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?"  
"Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?"  
"Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name,"  
"When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?"  
"But, wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?"  
"That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband:"  
"Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring,"  
"Your tributary drops belong to woe,"  
"Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy."  
"My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain,"  
"And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband:"  
"All this is comfort, wherefore weep I then?"  
"Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,"  
"That murder'd me: I would forget it fain,"  
"But, O, it presses to my memory,"  
"Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds:"  
"'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo--banished,'"  
"That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'"  
"Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death"  
"Was woe enough, if it had ended there:"  
"Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship"  
"And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,"  
"Why follow'd not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'"  
"Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,"  
"Which modern lamentations might have moved?"  
"But with a rear-ward following Tybalt's death,"  
"'Romeo is banished,' to speak that word,"  
"Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,"  
"All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished!'"  
"There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,"  
"In that word's death, no words can that woe sound."  
"Where is my father, and my mother, nurse?"  
"Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse:"  
"Will you go to them? I will bring you thither."  
"Wash they his wounds with tears: mine shall be spent,"  
"When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment."  
"Take up those cords: poor ropes, you are beguiled,"  
"Both you and I, for Romeo is exiled:"  
"He made you for a highway to my bed,"  
"But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed."  
"Come, cords, come, nurse, I'll to my wedding-bed,"  
"And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!"  
"Hie to your chamber: I'll find Romeo"  
"To comfort you: I wot well where he is."  
"Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night:"  
"I'll to him, he is hid at Laurence' cell."  
"O, find him! give this ring to my true knight,"  
"And bid him come to take his last farewell."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE III. Friar Laurence's cell."  
"Enter FRIAR LAURENCE"  
"Romeo, come forth, come forth, thou fearful man:"  
"Affliction is enamour'd of thy parts,"  
"And thou art wedded to calamity."  
"Enter ROMEO"  
"Father, what news? what is the prince's doom?"  
"What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand,"  
"That I yet know not?"  
"Too familiar"  
"Is my dear son with such sour company:"  
"I bring thee tidings of the prince's doom."  
"What less than dooms-day is the prince's doom?"  
"A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips,"  
"Not body's death, but body's banishment."  
"Ha, banishment! be merciful, say 'death,'"  
"For exile hath more terror in his look,"  
"Much more than death: do not say 'banishment.'"  
"Hence from Verona art thou banished:"  
"Be patient, for the world is broad and wide."  
"There is no world without Verona walls,"  
"But purgatory, torture, hell itself."  
"Hence-banished is banish'd from the world,"  
"And world's exile is death: then banished,"  
"Is death mis-term'd: calling death banishment,"  
"Thou cutt'st my head off with a golden axe,"  
"And smilest upon the stroke that murders me."  
"O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!"  
"Thy fault our law calls death, but the kind prince,"  
"Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,"  
"And turn'd that black word death to banishment:"  
"This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not."  
"'Tis torture, and not mercy: heaven is here,"  
"Where Juliet lives, and every cat and dog"  
"And little mouse, every unworthy thing,"  
"Live here in heaven and may look on her,"  
"But Romeo may not: more validity,"  
"More honourable state, more courtship lives"  
"In carrion-flies than Romeo: they my seize"  
"On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand"  
"And steal immortal blessing from her lips,"  
"Who even in pure and vestal modesty,"  
"Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin,"  
"But Romeo may not, he is banished:"  
"Flies may do this, but I from this must fly:"  
"They are free men, but I am banished."  
"And say'st thou yet that exile is not death?"  
"Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,"  
"No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,"  
"But 'banished' to kill me?--'banished'?"  
"O friar, the damned use that word in hell,"  
"Howlings attend it: how hast thou the heart,"  
"Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,"  
"A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,"  
"To mangle me with that word 'banished'?"  
"Thou fond mad man, hear me but speak a word."  
"O, thou wilt speak again of banishment."  
"I'll give thee armour to keep off that word:"  
"Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,"  
"To comfort thee, though thou art banished."  
"Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!"  
"Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,"  
"Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,"  
"It helps not, it prevails not: talk no more."  
"O, then I see that madmen have no ears."  
"How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?"  
"Let me dispute with thee of thy estate."  
"Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel:"  
"Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,"  
"An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,"  
"Doting like me and like me banished,"  
"Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,"  
"And fall upon the ground, as I do now,"  
"Taking the measure of an unmade grave."  
"Knocking within"  
"Arise, one knocks, good Romeo, hide thyself."  
"Not I, unless the breath of heartsick groans,"  
"Mist-like, infold me from the search of eyes."  
Knocking  
"Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise,"  
"Thou wilt be taken. Stay awhile! Stand up,"  
Knocking  
"Run to my study. By and by! God's will,"  
"What simpleness is this! I come, I come!"  
Knocking  
"Who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?"  
"[Within]  Let me come in, and you shall know"  
"my errand,"  
"I come from Lady Juliet."  
"Welcome, then."  
"Enter Nurse"  
"O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar,"  
"Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?"  
"There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk."  
"O, he is even in my mistress' case,"  
"Just in her case! O woful sympathy!"  
"Piteous predicament! Even so lies she,"  
"Blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering."  
"Stand up, stand up, stand, and you be a man:"  
"For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand,"  
"Why should you fall into so deep an O?"  
Nurse!  
"Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all."  
"Spakest thou of Juliet? how is it with her?"  
"Doth she not think me an old murderer,"  
"Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy"  
"With blood removed but little from her own?"  
"Where is she? and how doth she? and what says"  
"My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?"  
"O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps,"  
"And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,"  
"And Tybalt calls, and then on Romeo cries,"  
"And then down falls again."  
"As if that name,"  
"Shot from the deadly level of a gun,"  
"Did murder her, as that name's cursed hand"  
"Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,"  
"In what vile part of this anatomy"  
"Doth my name lodge? tell me, that I may sack"  
"The hateful mansion."  
"Drawing his sword"  
"Hold thy desperate hand:"  
"Art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art:"  
"Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote"  
"The unreasonable fury of a beast:"  
"Unseemly woman in a seeming man!"  
"Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!"  
"Thou hast amazed me: by my holy order,"  
"I thought thy disposition better temper'd."  
"Hast thou slain Tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself?"  
"And stay thy lady too that lives in thee,"  
"By doing damned hate upon thyself?"  
"Why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?"  
"Since birth, and heaven, and earth, all three do meet"  
"In thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose."  
"Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,"  
"Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,"  
"And usest none in that true use indeed"  
"Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit:"  
"Thy noble shape is but a form of wax,"  
"Digressing from the valour of a man,"  
"Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,"  
"Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish,"  
"Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,"  
"Misshapen in the conduct of them both,"  
"Like powder in a skitless soldier's flask,"  
"Is set afire by thine own ignorance,"  
"And thou dismember'd with thine own defence."  
"What, rouse thee, man! thy Juliet is alive,"  
"For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead,"  
"There art thou happy: Tybalt would kill thee,"  
"But thou slew'st Tybalt, there are thou happy too:"  
"The law that threaten'd death becomes thy friend"  
"And turns it to exile, there art thou happy:"  
"A pack of blessings lights up upon thy back,"  
"Happiness courts thee in her best array,"  
"But, like a misbehaved and sullen wench,"  
"Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love:"  
"Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable."  
"Go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed,"  
"Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her:"  
"But look thou stay not till the watch be set,"  
"For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,"  
"Where thou shalt live, till we can find a time"  
"To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,"  
"Beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back"  
"With twenty hundred thousand times more joy"  
"Than thou went'st forth in lamentation."  
"Go before, nurse: commend me to thy lady,"  
"And bid her hasten all the house to bed,"  
"Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto:"  
"Romeo is coming."  
"O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night"  
"To hear good counsel: O, what learning is!"  
"My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come."  
"Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide."  
"Here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir:"  
"Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late."  
Exit  
"How well my comfort is revived by this!"  
"Go hence, good night, and here stands all your state:"  
"Either be gone before the watch be set,"  
"Or by the break of day disguised from hence:"  
"Sojourn in Mantua, I'll find out your man,"  
"And he shall signify from time to time"  
"Every good hap to you that chances here:"  
"Give me thy hand, 'tis late: farewell, good night."  
"But that a joy past joy calls out on me,"  
"It were a grief, so brief to part with thee: Farewell."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE IV. A room in Capulet's house."  
"Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, and PARIS"  
"Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily,"  
"That we have had no time to move our daughter:"  
"Look you, she loved her kinsman Tybalt dearly,"  
"And so did I:--Well, we were born to die."  
"'Tis very late, she'll not come down to-night:"  
"I promise you, but for your company,"  
"I would have been a-bed an hour ago."  
"These times of woe afford no time to woo."  
"Madam, good night: commend me to your daughter."  
"I will, and know her mind early to-morrow,"  
"To-night she is mew'd up to her heaviness."  
"Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender"  
"Of my child's love: I think she will be ruled"  
"In all respects by me, nay, more, I doubt it not."  
"Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed,"  
"Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love,"  
"And bid her, mark you me, on Wednesday next--"  
"But, soft! what day is this?"  
"Monday, my lord,"  
"Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon,"  
"O' Thursday let it be: o' Thursday, tell her,"  
"She shall be married to this noble earl."  
"Will you be ready? do you like this haste?"  
"We'll keep no great ado,--a friend or two,"  
"For, hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,"  
"It may be thought we held him carelessly,"  
"Being our kinsman, if we revel much:"  
"Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,"  
"And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?"  
"My lord, I would that Thursday were to-morrow."  
"Well get you gone: o' Thursday be it, then."  
"Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed,"  
"Prepare her, wife, against this wedding-day."  
"Farewell, my lord. Light to my chamber, ho!"  
"Afore me! it is so very very late,"  
"That we may call it early by and by."  
"Good night."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE V. Capulet's orchard."  
"Enter ROMEO and JULIET above, at the window"  
"Wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day:"  
"It was the nightingale, and not the lark,"  
"That pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear,"  
"Nightly she sings on yon pomegranate-tree:"  
"Believe me, love, it was the nightingale."  
"It was the lark, the herald of the morn,"  
"No nightingale: look, love, what envious streaks"  
"Do lace the severing clouds in yonder east:"  
"Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day"  
"Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops."  
"I must be gone and live, or stay and die."  
"Yon light is not day-light, I know it, I:"  
"It is some meteor that the sun exhales,"  
"To be to thee this night a torch-bearer,"  
"And light thee on thy way to Mantua:"  
"Therefore stay yet, thou need'st not to be gone."  
"Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death,"  
"I am content, so thou wilt have it so."  
"I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,"  
"'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow,"  
"Nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat"  
"The vaulty heaven so high above our heads:"  
"I have more care to stay than will to go:"  
"Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so."  
"How is't, my soul? let's talk, it is not day."  
"It is, it is: hie hence, be gone, away!"  
"It is the lark that sings so out of tune,"  
"Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps."  
"Some say the lark makes sweet division,"  
"This doth not so, for she divideth us:"  
"Some say the lark and loathed toad change eyes,"  
"O, now I would they had changed voices too!"  
"Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,"  
"Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day,"  
"O, now be gone, more light and light it grows."  
"More light and light, more dark and dark our woes!"  
"Enter Nurse, to the chamber"  
Madam!  
Nurse?  
"Your lady mother is coming to your chamber:"  
"The day is broke, be wary, look about."  
Exit  
"Then, window, let day in, and let life out."  
"Farewell, farewell! one kiss, and I'll descend."  
"He goeth down"  
"Art thou gone so? love, lord, ay, husband, friend!"  
"I must hear from thee every day in the hour,"  
"For in a minute there are many days:"  
"O, by this count I shall be much in years"  
"Ere I again behold my Romeo!"  
Farewell!  
"I will omit no opportunity"  
"That may convey my greetings, love, to thee."  
"O think'st thou we shall ever meet again?"  
"I doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve"  
"For sweet discourses in our time to come."  
"O God, I have an ill-divining soul!"  
"Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,"  
"As one dead in the bottom of a tomb:"  
"Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale."  
"And trust me, love, in my eye so do you:"  
"Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!"  
Exit  
"O fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle:"  
"If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him."  
"That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, fortune,"  
"For then, I hope, thou wilt not keep him long,"  
"But send him back."  
"[Within]         Ho, daughter! are you up?"  
"Who is't that calls? is it my lady mother?"  
"Is she not down so late, or up so early?"  
"What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?"  
"Enter LADY CAPULET"  
"Why, how now, Juliet!"  
"Madam, I am not well."  
"Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?"  
"What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?"  
"An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live,"  
"Therefore, have done: some grief shows much of love,"  
"But much of grief shows still some want of wit."  
"Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss."  
"So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend"  
"Which you weep for."  
"Feeling so the loss,"  
"Cannot choose but ever weep the friend."  
"Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death,"  
"As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him."  
"What villain madam?"  
"That same villain, Romeo."  
"[Aside]  Villain and he be many miles asunder.--"  
"God Pardon him! I do, with all my heart,"  
"And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart."  
"That is, because the traitor murderer lives."  
"Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands:"  
"Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!"  
"We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not:"  
"Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,"  
"Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,"  
"Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram,"  
"That he shall soon keep Tybalt company:"  
"And then, I hope, thou wilt be satisfied."  
"Indeed, I never shall be satisfied"  
"With Romeo, till I behold him--dead--"  
"Is my poor heart for a kinsman vex'd."  
"Madam, if you could find out but a man"  
"To bear a poison, I would temper it,"  
"That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,"  
"Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors"  
"To hear him named, and cannot come to him."  
"To wreak the love I bore my cousin"  
"Upon his body that slaughter'd him!"  
"Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man."  
"But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl."  
"And joy comes well in such a needy time:"  
"What are they, I beseech your ladyship?"  
"Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child,"  
"One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,"  
"Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy,"  
"That thou expect'st not nor I look'd not for."  
"Madam, in happy time, what day is that?"  
"Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn,"  
"The gallant, young and noble gentleman,"  
"The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,"  
"Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride."  
"Now, by Saint Peter's Church and Peter too,"  
"He shall not make me there a joyful bride."  
"I wonder at this haste, that I must wed"  
"Ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo."  
"I pray you, tell my lord and father, madam,"  
"I will not marry yet, and, when I do, I swear,"  
"It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,"  
"Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!"  
"Here comes your father, tell him so yourself,"  
"And see how he will take it at your hands."  
"Enter CAPULET and Nurse"  
"When the sun sets, the air doth drizzle dew,"  
"But for the sunset of my brother's son"  
"It rains downright."  
"How now! a conduit, girl? what, still in tears?"  
"Evermore showering? In one little body"  
"Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind,"  
"For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,"  
"Do ebb and flow with tears, the bark thy body is,"  
"Sailing in this salt flood, the winds, thy sighs,"  
"Who, raging with thy tears, and they with them,"  
"Without a sudden calm, will overset"  
"Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife!"  
"Have you deliver'd to her our decree?"  
"Ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks."  
"I would the fool were married to her grave!"  
"Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife."  
"How! will she none? doth she not give us thanks?"  
"Is she not proud? doth she not count her blest,"  
"Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought"  
"So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?"  
"Not proud, you have, but thankful, that you have:"  
"Proud can I never be of what I hate,"  
"But thankful even for hate, that is meant love."  
"How now, how now, chop-logic! What is this?"  
"'Proud,' and 'I thank you,' and 'I thank you not,'"  
"And yet 'not proud,' mistress minion, you,"  
"Thank me no thankings, nor, proud me no prouds,"  
"But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next,"  
"To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,"  
"Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither."  
"Out, you green-sickness carrion! out, you baggage!"  
"You tallow-face!"  
"Fie, fie! what, are you mad?"  
"Good father, I beseech you on my knees,"  
"Hear me with patience but to speak a word."  
"Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!"  
"I tell thee what: get thee to church o' Thursday,"  
"Or never after look me in the face:"  
"Speak not, reply not, do not answer me,"  
"My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest"  
"That God had lent us but this only child,"  
"But now I see this one is one too much,"  
"And that we have a curse in having her:"  
"Out on her, hilding!"  
"God in heaven bless her!"  
"You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so."  
"And why, my lady wisdom? hold your tongue,"  
"Good prudence, smatter with your gossips, go."  
"I speak no treason."  
"O, God ye god-den."  
"May not one speak?"  
"Peace, you mumbling fool!"  
"Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,"  
"For here we need it not."  
"You are too hot."  
"God's bread! it makes me mad:"  
"Day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play,"  
"Alone, in company, still my care hath been"  
"To have her match'd: and having now provided"  
"A gentleman of noble parentage,"  
"Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,"  
"Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,"  
"Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man,"  
"And then to have a wretched puling fool,"  
"A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,"  
"To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love,"  
"I am too young, I pray you, pardon me.'"  
"But, as you will not wed, I'll pardon you:"  
"Graze where you will you shall not house with me:"  
"Look to't, think on't, I do not use to jest."  
"Thursday is near, lay hand on heart, advise:"  
"An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend,"  
"And you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in"  
"the streets,"  
"For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,"  
"Nor what is mine shall never do thee good:"  
"Trust to't, bethink you, I'll not be forsworn."  
Exit  
"Is there no pity sitting in the clouds,"  
"That sees into the bottom of my grief?"  
"O, sweet my mother, cast me not away!"  
"Delay this marriage for a month, a week,"  
"Or, if you do not, make the bridal bed"  
"In that dim monument where Tybalt lies."  
"Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word:"  
"Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee."  
Exit  
"O God!--O nurse, how shall this be prevented?"  
"My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven,"  
"How shall that faith return again to earth,"  
"Unless that husband send it me from heaven"  
"By leaving earth? comfort me, counsel me."  
"Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems"  
"Upon so soft a subject as myself!"  
"What say'st thou? hast thou not a word of joy?"  
"Some comfort, nurse."  
"Faith, here it is."  
"Romeo is banish'd, and all the world to nothing,"  
"That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you,"  
"Or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth."  
"Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,"  
"I think it best you married with the county."  
"O, he's a lovely gentleman!"  
"Romeo's a dishclout to him: an eagle, madam,"  
"Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye"  
"As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,"  
"I think you are happy in this second match,"  
"For it excels your first: or if it did not,"  
"Your first is dead, or 'twere as good he were,"  
"As living here and you no use of him."  
"Speakest thou from thy heart?"  
"And from my soul too,"  
"Or else beshrew them both."  
Amen!  
What?  
"Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much."  
"Go in: and tell my lady I am gone,"  
"Having displeased my father, to Laurence' cell,"  
"To make confession and to be absolved."  
"Marry, I will, and this is wisely done."  
Exit  
"Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!"  
"Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,"  
"Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue"  
"Which she hath praised him with above compare"  
"So many thousand times? Go, counsellor,"  
"Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain."  
"I'll to the friar, to know his remedy:"  
"If all else fail, myself have power to die."  
Exit  
"ACT IV"  
"SCENE I. Friar Laurence's cell."  
"Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and PARIS"  
"On Thursday, sir? the time is very short."  
"My father Capulet will have it so,"  
"And I am nothing slow to slack his haste."  
"You say you do not know the lady's mind:"  
"Uneven is the course, I like it not."  
"Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,"  
"And therefore have I little talk'd of love,"  
"For Venus smiles not in a house of tears."  
"Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous"  
"That she doth give her sorrow so much sway,"  
"And in his wisdom hastes our marriage,"  
"To stop the inundation of her tears,"  
"Which, too much minded by herself alone,"  
"May be put from her by society:"  
"Now do you know the reason of this haste."  
"[Aside]  I would I knew not why it should be slow'd."  
"Look, sir, here comes the lady towards my cell."  
"Enter JULIET"  
"Happily met, my lady and my wife!"  
"That may be, sir, when I may be a wife."  
"That may be must be, love, on Thursday next."  
"What must be shall be."  
"That's a certain text."  
"Come you to make confession to this father?"  
"To answer that, I should confess to you."  
"Do not deny to him that you love me."  
"I will confess to you that I love him."  
"So will ye, I am sure, that you love me."  
"If I do so, it will be of more price,"  
"Being spoke behind your back, than to your face."  
"Poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears."  
"The tears have got small victory by that,"  
"For it was bad enough before their spite."  
"Thou wrong'st it, more than tears, with that report."  
"That is no slander, sir, which is a truth,"  
"And what I spake, I spake it to my face."  
"Thy face is mine, and thou hast slander'd it."  
"It may be so, for it is not mine own."  
"Are you at leisure, holy father, now,"  
"Or shall I come to you at evening mass?"  
"My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now."  
"My lord, we must entreat the time alone."  
"God shield I should disturb devotion!"  
"Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye:"  
"Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss."  
Exit  
"O shut the door! and when thou hast done so,"  
"Come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help!"  
"Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief,"  
"It strains me past the compass of my wits:"  
"I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,"  
"On Thursday next be married to this county."  
"Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,"  
"Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it:"  
"If, in thy wisdom, thou canst give no help,"  
"Do thou but call my resolution wise,"  
"And with this knife I'll help it presently."  
"God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands,"  
"And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo seal'd,"  
"Shall be the label to another deed,"  
"Or my true heart with treacherous revolt"  
"Turn to another, this shall slay them both:"  
"Therefore, out of thy long-experienced time,"  
"Give me some present counsel, or, behold,"  
"'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife"  
"Shall play the umpire, arbitrating that"  
"Which the commission of thy years and art"  
"Could to no issue of true honour bring."  
"Be not so long to speak, I long to die,"  
"If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy."  
"Hold, daughter: I do spy a kind of hope,"  
"Which craves as desperate an execution."  
"As that is desperate which we would prevent."  
"If, rather than to marry County Paris,"  
"Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,"  
"Then is it likely thou wilt undertake"  
"A thing like death to chide away this shame,"  
"That copest with death himself to scape from it:"  
"And, if thou darest, I'll give thee remedy."  
"O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,"  
"From off the battlements of yonder tower,"  
"Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk"  
"Where serpents are, chain me with roaring bears,"  
"Or shut me nightly in a charnel-house,"  
"O'er-cover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,"  
"With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls,"  
"Or bid me go into a new-made grave"  
"And hide me with a dead man in his shroud,"  
"Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble,"  
"And I will do it without fear or doubt,"  
"To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love."  
"Hold, then, go home, be merry, give consent"  
"To marry Paris: Wednesday is to-morrow:"  
"To-morrow night look that thou lie alone,"  
"Let not thy nurse lie with thee in thy chamber:"  
"Take thou this vial, being then in bed,"  
"And this distilled liquor drink thou off,"  
"When presently through all thy veins shall run"  
"A cold and drowsy humour, for no pulse"  
"Shall keep his native progress, but surcease:"  
"No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest,"  
"The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade"  
"To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall,"  
"Like death, when he shuts up the day of life,"  
"Each part, deprived of supple government,"  
"Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death:"  
"And in this borrow'd likeness of shrunk death"  
"Thou shalt continue two and forty hours,"  
"And then awake as from a pleasant sleep."  
"Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes"  
"To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead:"  
"Then, as the manner of our country is,"  
"In thy best robes uncover'd on the bier"  
"Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault"  
"Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie."  
"In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,"  
"Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift,"  
"And hither shall he come: and he and I"  
"Will watch thy waking, and that very night"  
"Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua."  
"And this shall free thee from this present shame,"  
"If no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear,"  
"Abate thy valour in the acting it."  
"Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!"  
"Hold, get you gone, be strong and prosperous"  
"In this resolve: I'll send a friar with speed"  
"To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord."  
"Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford."  
"Farewell, dear father!"  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. Hall in Capulet's house."  
"Enter CAPULET, LADY  CAPULET, Nurse, and two Servingmen"  
"So many guests invite as here are writ."  
"Exit First Servant"  
"Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks."  
"You shall have none ill, sir, for I'll try if they"  
"can lick their fingers."  
"How canst thou try them so?"  
"Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his"  
"own fingers: therefore he that cannot lick his"  
"fingers goes not with me."  
"Go, be gone."  
"Exit Second Servant"  
"We shall be much unfurnished for this time."  
"What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?"  
"Ay, forsooth."  
"Well, he may chance to do some good on her:"  
"A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is."  
"See where she comes from shrift with merry look."  
"Enter JULIET"  
"How now, my headstrong! where have you been gadding?"  
"Where I have learn'd me to repent the sin"  
"Of disobedient opposition"  
"To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd"  
"By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here,"  
"And beg your pardon: pardon, I beseech you!"  
"Henceforward I am ever ruled by you."  
"Send for the county, go tell him of this:"  
"I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning."  
"I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell,"  
"And gave him what becomed love I might,"  
"Not step o'er the bounds of modesty."  
"Why, I am glad on't, this is well: stand up:"  
"This is as't should be. Let me see the county,"  
"Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither."  
"Now, afore God! this reverend holy friar,"  
"Our whole city is much bound to him."  
"Nurse, will you go with me into my closet,"  
"To help me sort such needful ornaments"  
"As you think fit to furnish me to-morrow?"  
"No, not till Thursday, there is time enough."  
"Go, nurse, go with her: we'll to church to-morrow."  
"Exeunt JULIET and Nurse"  
"We shall be short in our provision:"  
"'Tis now near night."  
"Tush, I will stir about,"  
"And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife:"  
"Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her,"  
"I'll not to bed to-night, let me alone,"  
"I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!"  
"They are all forth. Well, I will walk myself"  
"To County Paris, to prepare him up"  
"Against to-morrow: my heart is wondrous light,"  
"Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE III. Juliet's chamber."  
"Enter JULIET and Nurse"  
"Ay, those attires are best: but, gentle nurse,"  
"I pray thee, leave me to my self to-night,"  
"For I have need of many orisons"  
"To move the heavens to smile upon my state,"  
"Which, well thou know'st, is cross, and full of sin."  
"Enter LADY CAPULET"  
"What, are you busy, ho? need you my help?"  
"No, madam, we have cull'd such necessaries"  
"As are behoveful for our state to-morrow:"  
"So please you, let me now be left alone,"  
"And let the nurse this night sit up with you,"  
"For, I am sure, you have your hands full all,"  
"In this so sudden business."  
"Good night:"  
"Get thee to bed, and rest, for thou hast need."  
"Exeunt LADY CAPULET and Nurse"  
"Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again."  
"I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins,"  
"That almost freezes up the heat of life:"  
"I'll call them back again to comfort me:"  
"Nurse! What should she do here?"  
"My dismal scene I needs must act alone."  
"Come, vial."  
"What if this mixture do not work at all?"  
"Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?"  
"No, no: this shall forbid it: lie thou there."  
"Laying down her dagger"  
"What if it be a poison, which the friar"  
"Subtly hath minister'd to have me dead,"  
"Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd,"  
"Because he married me before to Romeo?"  
"I fear it is: and yet, methinks, it should not,"  
"For he hath still been tried a holy man."  
"How if, when I am laid into the tomb,"  
"I wake before the time that Romeo"  
"Come to redeem me? there's a fearful point!"  
"Shall I not, then, be stifled in the vault,"  
"To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,"  
"And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?"  
"Or, if I live, is it not very like,"  
"The horrible conceit of death and night,"  
"Together with the terror of the place,--"  
"As in a vault, an ancient receptacle,"  
"Where, for these many hundred years, the bones"  
"Of all my buried ancestors are packed:"  
"Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,"  
"Lies festering in his shroud, where, as they say,"  
"At some hours in the night spirits resort,--"  
"Alack, alack, is it not like that I,"  
"So early waking, what with loathsome smells,"  
"And shrieks like mandrakes' torn out of the earth,"  
"That living mortals, hearing them, run mad:--"  
"O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,"  
"Environed with all these hideous fears?"  
"And madly play with my forefather's joints?"  
"And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud?"  
"And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone,"  
"As with a club, dash out my desperate brains?"  
"O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost"  
"Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body"  
"Upon a rapier's point: stay, Tybalt, stay!"  
"Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee."  
"She falls upon her bed, within the curtains"  
"SCENE IV. Hall in Capulet's house."  
"Enter LADY CAPULET and Nurse"  
"Hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse."  
"They call for dates and quinces in the pastry."  
"Enter CAPULET"  
"Come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crow'd,"  
"The curfew-bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock:"  
"Look to the baked meats, good Angelica:"  
"Spare not for the cost."  
"Go, you cot-quean, go,"  
"Get you to bed, faith, You'll be sick to-morrow"  
"For this night's watching."  
"No, not a whit: what! I have watch'd ere now"  
"All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick."  
"Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time,"  
"But I will watch you from such watching now."  
"Exeunt LADY CAPULET and Nurse"  
"A jealous hood, a jealous hood!"  
"Enter three or four Servingmen, with spits, logs, and baskets"  
"Now, fellow,"  
"What's there?"  
"Things for the cook, sir, but I know not what."  
"Make haste, make haste."  
"Exit First Servant"  
"Sirrah, fetch drier logs:"  
"Call Peter, he will show thee where they are."  
"I have a head, sir, that will find out logs,"  
"And never trouble Peter for the matter."  
Exit  
"Mass, and well said, a merry whoreson, ha!"  
"Thou shalt be logger-head. Good faith, 'tis day:"  
"The county will be here with music straight,"  
"For so he said he would: I hear him near."  
"Music within"  
"Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, nurse, I say!"  
"Re-enter Nurse"  
"Go waken Juliet, go and trim her up,"  
"I'll go and chat with Paris: hie, make haste,"  
"Make haste, the bridegroom he is come already:"  
"Make haste, I say."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE V. Juliet's chamber."  
"Enter Nurse"  
"Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! fast, I warrant her, she:"  
"Why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed!"  
"Why, love, I say! madam! sweet-heart! why, bride!"  
"What, not a word? you take your pennyworths now,"  
"Sleep for a week, for the next night, I warrant,"  
"The County Paris hath set up his rest,"  
"That you shall rest but little. God forgive me,"  
"Marry, and amen, how sound is she asleep!"  
"I must needs wake her. Madam, madam, madam!"  
"Ay, let the county take you in your bed,"  
"He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?"  
"Undraws the curtains"  
"What, dress'd! and in your clothes! and down again!"  
"I must needs wake you, Lady! lady! lady!"  
"Alas, alas! Help, help! my lady's dead!"  
"O, well-a-day, that ever I was born!"  
"Some aqua vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!"  
"Enter LADY CAPULET"  
"What noise is here?"  
"O lamentable day!"  
"What is the matter?"  
"Look, look! O heavy day!"  
"O me, O me! My child, my only life,"  
"Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!"  
"Help, help! Call help."  
"Enter CAPULET"  
"For shame, bring Juliet forth, her lord is come."  
"She's dead, deceased, she's dead, alack the day!"  
"Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!"  
"Ha! let me see her: out, alas! she's cold:"  
"Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff,"  
"Life and these lips have long been separated:"  
"Death lies on her like an untimely frost"  
"Upon the sweetest flower of all the field."  
"O lamentable day!"  
"O woful time!"  
"Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,"  
"Ties up my tongue, and will not let me speak."  
"Enter FRIAR LAURENCE and PARIS, with Musicians"  
"Come, is the bride ready to go to church?"  
"Ready to go, but never to return."  
"O son! the night before thy wedding-day"  
"Hath Death lain with thy wife. There she lies,"  
"Flower as she was, deflowered by him."  
"Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir,"  
"My daughter he hath wedded: I will die,"  
"And leave him all, life, living, all is Death's."  
"Have I thought long to see this morning's face,"  
"And doth it give me such a sight as this?"  
"Accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!"  
"Most miserable hour that e'er time saw"  
"In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!"  
"But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,"  
"But one thing to rejoice and solace in,"  
"And cruel death hath catch'd it from my sight!"  
"O woe! O woful, woful, woful day!"  
"Most lamentable day, most woful day,"  
"That ever, ever, I did yet behold!"  
"O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!"  
"Never was seen so black a day as this:"  
"O woful day, O woful day!"  
"Beguiled, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!"  
"Most detestable death, by thee beguil'd,"  
"By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!"  
"O love! O life! not life, but love in death!"  
"Despised, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!"  
"Uncomfortable time, why camest thou now"  
"To murder, murder our solemnity?"  
"O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!"  
"Dead art thou! Alack! my child is dead,"  
"And with my child my joys are buried."  
"Peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives not"  
"In these confusions. Heaven and yourself"  
"Had part in this fair maid, now heaven hath all,"  
"And all the better is it for the maid:"  
"Your part in her you could not keep from death,"  
"But heaven keeps his part in eternal life."  
"The most you sought was her promotion,"  
"For 'twas your heaven she should be advanced:"  
"And weep ye now, seeing she is advanced"  
"Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?"  
"O, in this love, you love your child so ill,"  
"That you run mad, seeing that she is well:"  
"She's not well married that lives married long,"  
"But she's best married that dies married young."  
"Dry up your tears, and stick your rosemary"  
"On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,"  
"In all her best array bear her to church:"  
"For though fond nature bids us an lament,"  
"Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment."  
"All things that we ordained festival,"  
"Turn from their office to black funeral,"  
"Our instruments to melancholy bells,"  
"Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast,"  
"Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change,"  
"Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse,"  
"And all things change them to the contrary."  
"Sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him,"  
"And go, Sir Paris, every one prepare"  
"To follow this fair corse unto her grave:"  
"The heavens do lour upon you for some ill,"  
"Move them no more by crossing their high will."  
"Exeunt CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, PARIS, and FRIAR LAURENCE"  
"Faith, we may put up our pipes, and be gone."  
"Honest goodfellows, ah, put up, put up,"  
"For, well you know, this is a pitiful case."  
Exit  
"Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended."  
"Enter PETER"  
"Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease, Heart's"  
"ease:' O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'"  
"Why 'Heart's ease?'"  
"O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My"  
"heart is full of woe:' O, play me some merry dump,"  
"to comfort me."  
"Not a dump we, 'tis no time to play now."  
"You will not, then?"  
No.  
"I will then give it you soundly."  
"What will you give us?"  
"No money, on my faith, but the gleek,"  
"I will give you the minstrel."  
"Then I will give you the serving-creature."  
"Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on"  
"your pate. I will carry no crotchets: I'll re you,"  
"I'll fa you, do you note me?"  
"An you re us and fa us, you note us."  
"Pray you, put up your dagger, and put out your wit."  
"Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you"  
"with an iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer"  
"me like men:"  
"'When griping grief the heart doth wound,"  
"And doleful dumps the mind oppress,"  
"Then music with her silver sound'--"  
"why 'silver sound'? why 'music with her silver"  
"sound'? What say you, Simon Catling?"  
"Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound."  
"Pretty! What say you, Hugh Rebeck?"  
"I say 'silver sound,' because musicians sound for silver."  
"Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?"  
"Faith, I know not what to say."  
"O, I cry you mercy, you are the singer: I will say"  
"for you. It is 'music with her silver sound,'"  
"because musicians have no gold for sounding:"  
"'Then music with her silver sound"  
"With speedy help doth lend redress.'"  
Exit  
"What a pestilent knave is this same!"  
"Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the"  
"mourners, and stay dinner."  
Exeunt  
"ACT V"  
"SCENE I. Mantua. A street."  
"Enter ROMEO"  
"If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep,"  
"My dreams presage some joyful news at hand:"  
"My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,"  
"And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit"  
"Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts."  
"I dreamt my lady came and found me dead--"  
"Strange dream, that gives a dead man leave"  
"to think!--"  
"And breathed such life with kisses in my lips,"  
"That I revived, and was an emperor."  
"Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,"  
"When but love's shadows are so rich in joy!"  
"Enter BALTHASAR, booted"  
"News from Verona!--How now, Balthasar!"  
"Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?"  
"How doth my lady? Is my father well?"  
"How fares my Juliet? that I ask again,"  
"For nothing can be ill, if she be well."  
"Then she is well, and nothing can be ill:"  
"Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,"  
"And her immortal part with angels lives."  
"I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault,"  
"And presently took post to tell it you:"  
"O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,"  
"Since you did leave it for my office, sir."  
"Is it even so? then I defy you, stars!"  
"Thou know'st my lodging: get me ink and paper,"  
"And hire post-horses, I will hence to-night."  
"I do beseech you, sir, have patience:"  
"Your looks are pale and wild, and do import"  
"Some misadventure."  
"Tush, thou art deceived:"  
"Leave me, and do the thing I bid thee do."  
"Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?"  
"No, my good lord."  
"No matter: get thee gone,"  
"And hire those horses, I'll be with thee straight."  
"Exit BALTHASAR"  
"Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night."  
"Let's see for means: O mischief, thou art swift"  
"To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!"  
"I do remember an apothecary,--"  
"And hereabouts he dwells,--which late I noted"  
"In tatter'd weeds, with overwhelming brows,"  
"Culling of simples, meagre were his looks,"  
"Sharp misery had worn him to the bones:"  
"And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,"  
"An alligator stuff'd, and other skins"  
"Of ill-shaped fishes, and about his shelves"  
"A beggarly account of empty boxes,"  
"Green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds,"  
"Remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,"  
"Were thinly scatter'd, to make up a show."  
"Noting this penury, to myself I said"  
"'An if a man did need a poison now,"  
"Whose sale is present death in Mantua,"  
"Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'"  
"O, this same thought did but forerun my need,"  
"And this same needy man must sell it me."  
"As I remember, this should be the house."  
"Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut."  
"What, ho! apothecary!"  
"Enter Apothecary"  
"Who calls so loud?"  
"Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor:"  
"Hold, there is forty ducats: let me have"  
"A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear"  
"As will disperse itself through all the veins"  
"That the life-weary taker may fall dead"  
"And that the trunk may be discharged of breath"  
"As violently as hasty powder fired"  
"Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb."  
"Such mortal drugs I have, but Mantua's law"  
"Is death to any he that utters them."  
"Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness,"  
"And fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks,"  
"Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,"  
"Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back,"  
"The world is not thy friend nor the world's law,"  
"The world affords no law to make thee rich,"  
"Then be not poor, but break it, and take this."  
"My poverty, but not my will, consents."  
"I pay thy poverty, and not thy will."  
"Put this in any liquid thing you will,"  
"And drink it off, and, if you had the strength"  
"Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight."  
"There is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls,"  
"Doing more murders in this loathsome world,"  
"Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell."  
"I sell thee poison, thou hast sold me none."  
"Farewell: buy food, and get thyself in flesh."  
"Come, cordial and not poison, go with me"  
"To Juliet's grave, for there must I use thee."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. Friar Laurence's cell."  
"Enter FRIAR JOHN"  
"Holy Franciscan friar! brother, ho!"  
"Enter FRIAR LAURENCE"  
"This same should be the voice of Friar John."  
"Welcome from Mantua: what says Romeo?"  
"Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter."  
"Going to find a bare-foot brother out"  
"One of our order, to associate me,"  
"Here in this city visiting the sick,"  
"And finding him, the searchers of the town,"  
"Suspecting that we both were in a house"  
"Where the infectious pestilence did reign,"  
"Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth,"  
"So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd."  
"Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?"  
"I could not send it,--here it is again,--"  
"Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,"  
"So fearful were they of infection."  
"Unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood,"  
"The letter was not nice but full of charge"  
"Of dear import, and the neglecting it"  
"May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,"  
"Get me an iron crow, and bring it straight"  
"Unto my cell."  
"Brother, I'll go and bring it thee."  
Exit  
"Now must I to the monument alone,"  
"Within three hours will fair Juliet wake:"  
"She will beshrew me much that Romeo"  
"Hath had no notice of these accidents,"  
"But I will write again to Mantua,"  
"And keep her at my cell till Romeo come,"  
"Poor living corse, closed in a dead man's tomb!"  
Exit  
"SCENE III. A churchyard, in it a tomb belonging to the Capulets."  
"Enter PARIS, and his Page bearing flowers and a torch"  
"Give me thy torch, boy: hence, and stand aloof:"  
"Yet put it out, for I would not be seen."  
"Under yond yew-trees lay thee all along,"  
"Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground,"  
"So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread,"  
"Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves,"  
"But thou shalt hear it: whistle then to me,"  
"As signal that thou hear'st something approach."  
"Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go."  
"[Aside]  I am almost afraid to stand alone"  
"Here in the churchyard, yet I will adventure."  
Retires  
"Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew,--"  
"O woe! thy canopy is dust and stones,--"  
"Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,"  
"Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans:"  
"The obsequies that I for thee will keep"  
"Nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep."  
"The Page whistles"  
"The boy gives warning something doth approach."  
"What cursed foot wanders this way to-night,"  
"To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?"  
"What with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile."  
Retires  
"Enter ROMEO and BALTHASAR, with a torch, mattock,  and c"  
"Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron."  
"Hold, take this letter, early in the morning"  
"See thou deliver it to my lord and father."  
"Give me the light: upon thy life, I charge thee,"  
"Whate'er thou hear'st or seest, stand all aloof,"  
"And do not interrupt me in my course."  
"Why I descend into this bed of death,"  
"Is partly to behold my lady's face,"  
"But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger"  
"A precious ring, a ring that I must use"  
"In dear employment: therefore hence, be gone:"  
"But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry"  
"In what I further shall intend to do,"  
"By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint"  
"And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs:"  
"The time and my intents are savage-wild,"  
"More fierce and more inexorable far"  
"Than empty tigers or the roaring sea."  
"I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you."  
"So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that:"  
"Live, and be prosperous: and farewell, good fellow."  
"[Aside]  For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout:"  
"His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt."  
Retires  
"Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,"  
"Gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth,"  
"Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,"  
"And, in despite, I'll cram thee with more food!"  
"Opens the tomb"  
"This is that banish'd haughty Montague,"  
"That murder'd my love's cousin, with which grief,"  
"It is supposed, the fair creature died,"  
"And here is come to do some villanous shame"  
"To the dead bodies: I will apprehend him."  
"Comes forward"  
"Stop thy unhallow'd toil, vile Montague!"  
"Can vengeance be pursued further than death?"  
"Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee:"  
"Obey, and go with me, for thou must die."  
"I must indeed, and therefore came I hither."  
"Good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man,"  
"Fly hence, and leave me: think upon these gone,"  
"Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,"  
"Put not another sin upon my head,"  
"By urging me to fury: O, be gone!"  
"By heaven, I love thee better than myself,"  
"For I come hither arm'd against myself:"  
"Stay not, be gone, live, and hereafter say,"  
"A madman's mercy bade thee run away."  
"I do defy thy conjurations,"  
"And apprehend thee for a felon here."  
"Wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy!"  
"They fight"  
"O Lord, they fight! I will go call the watch."  
Exit  
"O, I am slain!"  
Falls  
"If thou be merciful,"  
"Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet."  
Dies  
"In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face."  
"Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!"  
"What said my man, when my betossed soul"  
"Did not attend him as we rode? I think"  
"He told me Paris should have married Juliet:"  
"Said he not so? or did I dream it so?"  
"Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet,"  
"To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,"  
"One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!"  
"I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave,"  
"A grave? O no! a lantern, slaughter'd youth,"  
"For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes"  
"This vault a feasting presence full of light."  
"Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd."  
"Laying PARIS in the tomb"  
"How oft when men are at the point of death"  
"Have they been merry! which their keepers call"  
"A lightning before death: O, how may I"  
"Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!"  
"Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,"  
"Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty:"  
"Thou art not conquer'd, beauty's ensign yet"  
"Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,"  
"And death's pale flag is not advanced there."  
"Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?"  
"O, what more favour can I do to thee,"  
"Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain"  
"To sunder his that was thine enemy?"  
"Forgive me, cousin! Ah, dear Juliet,"  
"Why art thou yet so fair? shall I believe"  
"That unsubstantial death is amorous,"  
"And that the lean abhorred monster keeps"  
"Thee here in dark to be his paramour?"  
"For fear of that, I still will stay with thee,"  
"And never from this palace of dim night"  
"Depart again: here, here will I remain"  
"With worms that are thy chamber-maids, O, here"  
"Will I set up my everlasting rest,"  
"And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars"  
"From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!"  
"Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you"  
"The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss"  
"A dateless bargain to engrossing death!"  
"Come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide!"  
"Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on"  
"The dashing rocks thy sea-sick weary bark!"  
"Here's to my love!"  
Drinks  
"O true apothecary!"  
"Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die."  
Dies  
"Enter, at the other end of the churchyard, FRIAR LAURENCE, with a lantern, crow, and spade"  
"Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night"  
"Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?"  
"Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well."  
"Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,"  
"What torch is yond, that vainly lends his light"  
"To grubs and eyeless skulls? as I discern,"  
"It burneth in the Capel's monument."  
"It doth so, holy sir, and there's my master,"  
"One that you love."  
"Who is it?"  
Romeo.  
"How long hath he been there?"  
"Full half an hour."  
"Go with me to the vault."  
"I dare not, sir"  
"My master knows not but I am gone hence,"  
"And fearfully did menace me with death,"  
"If I did stay to look on his intents."  
"Stay, then, I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me:"  
"O, much I fear some ill unlucky thing."  
"As I did sleep under this yew-tree here,"  
"I dreamt my master and another fought,"  
"And that my master slew him."  
Romeo!  
Advances  
"Alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains"  
"The stony entrance of this sepulchre?"  
"What mean these masterless and gory swords"  
"To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?"  
"Enters the tomb"  
"Romeo! O, pale! Who else? what, Paris too?"  
"And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour"  
"Is guilty of this lamentable chance!"  
"The lady stirs."  
"JULIET wakes"  
"O comfortable friar! where is my lord?"  
"I do remember well where I should be,"  
"And there I am. Where is my Romeo?"  
"Noise within"  
"I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest"  
"Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep:"  
"A greater power than we can contradict"  
"Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away."  
"Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead,"  
"And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee"  
"Among a sisterhood of holy nuns:"  
"Stay not to question, for the watch is coming,"  
"Come, go, good Juliet,"  
"Noise again"  
"I dare no longer stay."  
"Go, get thee hence, for I will not away."  
"Exit FRIAR LAURENCE"  
"What's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand?"  
"Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end:"  
"O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop"  
"To help me after? I will kiss thy lips,"  
"Haply some poison yet doth hang on them,"  
"To make die with a restorative."  
"Kisses him"  
"Thy lips are warm."  
"[Within]  Lead, boy: which way?"  
"Yea, noise? then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!"  
"Snatching ROMEO's dagger"  
"This is thy sheath,"  
"Stabs herself"  
"there rust, and let me die."  
"Falls on ROMEO's body, and dies"  
"Enter Watch, with the Page of PARIS"  
"This is the place, there, where the torch doth burn."  
"The ground is bloody, search about the churchyard:"  
"Go, some of you, whoe'er you find attach."  
"Pitiful sight! here lies the county slain,"  
"And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,"  
"Who here hath lain these two days buried."  
"Go, tell the prince: run to the Capulets:"  
"Raise up the Montagues: some others search:"  
"We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,"  
"But the true ground of all these piteous woes"  
"We cannot without circumstance descry."  
"Re-enter some of the Watch, with BALTHASAR"  
"Here's Romeo's man, we found him in the churchyard."  
"Hold him in safety, till the prince come hither."  
"Re-enter others of the Watch, with FRIAR LAURENCE"  
"Here is a friar, that trembles, sighs and weeps:"  
"We took this mattock and this spade from him,"  
"As he was coming from this churchyard side."  
"A great suspicion: stay the friar too."  
"Enter the PRINCE and Attendants"  
"What misadventure is so early up,"  
"That calls our person from our morning's rest?"  
"Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, and others"  
"What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?"  
"The people in the street cry Romeo,"  
"Some Juliet, and some Paris, and all run,"  
"With open outcry toward our monument."  
"What fear is this which startles in our ears?"  
"Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain,"  
"And Romeo dead, and Juliet, dead before,"  
"Warm and new kill'd."  
"Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes."  
"Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,"  
"With instruments upon them, fit to open"  
"These dead men's tombs."  
"O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!"  
"This dagger hath mista'en--for, lo, his house"  
"Is empty on the back of Montague,--"  
"And it mis-sheathed in my daughter's bosom!"  
"O me! this sight of death is as a bell,"  
"That warns my old age to a sepulchre."  
"Enter MONTAGUE and others"  
"Come, Montague, for thou art early up,"  
"To see thy son and heir more early down."  
"Alas, my liege, my wife is dead to-night,"  
"Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath:"  
"What further woe conspires against mine age?"  
"Look, and thou shalt see."  
"O thou untaught! what manners is in this?"  
"To press before thy father to a grave?"  
"Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,"  
"Till we can clear these ambiguities,"  
"And know their spring, their head, their"  
"true descent,"  
"And then will I be general of your woes,"  
"And lead you even to death: meantime forbear,"  
"And let mischance be slave to patience."  
"Bring forth the parties of suspicion."  
"I am the greatest, able to do least,"  
"Yet most suspected, as the time and place"  
"Doth make against me of this direful murder,"  
"And here I stand, both to impeach and purge"  
"Myself condemned and myself excused."  
"Then say at once what thou dost know in this."  
"I will be brief, for my short date of breath"  
"Is not so long as is a tedious tale."  
"Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet,"  
"And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife:"  
"I married them, and their stol'n marriage-day"  
"Was Tybalt's dooms-day, whose untimely death"  
"Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from the city,"  
"For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pined."  
"You, to remove that siege of grief from her,"  
"Betroth'd and would have married her perforce"  
"To County Paris: then comes she to me,"  
"And, with wild looks, bid me devise some mean"  
"To rid her from this second marriage,"  
"Or in my cell there would she kill herself."  
"Then gave I her, so tutor'd by my art,"  
"A sleeping potion, which so took effect"  
"As I intended, for it wrought on her"  
"The form of death: meantime I writ to Romeo,"  
"That he should hither come as this dire night,"  
"To help to take her from her borrow'd grave,"  
"Being the time the potion's force should cease."  
"But he which bore my letter, Friar John,"  
"Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight"  
"Return'd my letter back. Then all alone"  
"At the prefixed hour of her waking,"  
"Came I to take her from her kindred's vault,"  
"Meaning to keep her closely at my cell,"  
"Till I conveniently could send to Romeo:"  
"But when I came, some minute ere the time"  
"Of her awaking, here untimely lay"  
"The noble Paris and true Romeo dead."  
"She wakes, and I entreated her come forth,"  
"And bear this work of heaven with patience:"  
"But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,"  
"And she, too desperate, would not go with me,"  
"But, as it seems, did violence on herself."  
"All this I know, and to the marriage"  
"Her nurse is privy: and, if aught in this"  
"Miscarried by my fault, let my old life"  
"Be sacrificed, some hour before his time,"  
"Unto the rigour of severest law."  
"We still have known thee for a holy man."  
"Where's Romeo's man? what can he say in this?"  
"I brought my master news of Juliet's death,"  
"And then in post he came from Mantua"  
"To this same place, to this same monument."  
"This letter he early bid me give his father,"  
"And threatened me with death, going in the vault,"  
"I departed not and left him there."  
"Give me the letter, I will look on it."  
"Where is the county's page, that raised the watch?"  
"Sirrah, what made your master in this place?"  
"He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave,"  
"And bid me stand aloof, and so I did:"  
"Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb,"  
"And by and by my master drew on him,"  
"And then I ran away to call the watch."  
"This letter doth make good the friar's words,"  
"Their course of love, the tidings of her death:"  
"And here he writes that he did buy a poison"  
"Of a poor 'pothecary, and therewithal"  
"Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet."  
"Where be these enemies? Capulet! Montague!"  
"See, what a scourge is laid upon your hate,"  
"That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love."  
"And I for winking at your discords too"  
"Have lost a brace of kinsmen: all are punish'd."  
"O brother Montague, give me thy hand:"  
"This is my daughter's jointure, for no more"  
"Can I demand."  
"But I can give thee more:"  
"For I will raise her statue in pure gold,"  
"That while Verona by that name is known,"  
"There shall no figure at such rate be set"  
"As that of true and faithful Juliet."  
"As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie,"  
"Poor sacrifices of our enmity!"  
"A glooming peace this morning with it brings,"  
"The sun, for sorrow, will not show his head:"  
"Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things,"  
"Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished:"  
"For never was a story of more woe"  
"Than this of Juliet and her Romeo."  
 } 
 
Julius Caesar 
 
"ACT I"  
"SCENE I. Rome. A street."  
"Enter FLAVIUS, MARULLUS, and certain Commoners"  
"Hence! home, you idle creatures get you home:"  
"Is this a holiday? what! know you not,"  
"Being mechanical, you ought not walk"  
"Upon a labouring day without the sign"  
"Of your profession? Speak, what trade art thou?"  
"Why, sir, a carpenter."  
"Where is thy leather apron and thy rule?"  
"What dost thou with thy best apparel on?"  
"You, sir, what trade are you?"  
"Truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, I am but,"  
"as you would say, a cobbler."  
"But what trade art thou? answer me directly."  
"A trade, sir, that, I hope, I may use with a safe"  
"conscience, which is, indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles."  
"What trade, thou knave? thou naughty knave, what trade?"  
"Nay, I beseech you, sir, be not out with me: yet,"  
"if you be out, sir, I can mend you."  
"What meanest thou by that? mend me, thou saucy fellow!"  
"Why, sir, cobble you."  
"Thou art a cobbler, art thou?"  
"Truly, sir, all that I live by is with the awl: I"  
"meddle with no tradesman's matters, nor women's"  
"matters, but with awl. I am, indeed, sir, a surgeon"  
"to old shoes, when they are in great danger, I"  
"recover them. As proper men as ever trod upon"  
"neat's leather have gone upon my handiwork."  
"But wherefore art not in thy shop today?"  
"Why dost thou lead these men about the streets?"  
"Truly, sir, to wear out their shoes, to get myself"  
"into more work. But, indeed, sir, we make holiday,"  
"to see Caesar and to rejoice in his triumph."  
"Wherefore rejoice? What conquest brings he home?"  
"What tributaries follow him to Rome,"  
"To grace in captive bonds his chariot-wheels?"  
"You blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things!"  
"O you hard hearts, you cruel men of Rome,"  
"Knew you not Pompey? Many a time and oft"  
"Have you climb'd up to walls and battlements,"  
"To towers and windows, yea, to chimney-tops,"  
"Your infants in your arms, and there have sat"  
"The livelong day, with patient expectation,"  
"To see great Pompey pass the streets of Rome:"  
"And when you saw his chariot but appear,"  
"Have you not made an universal shout,"  
"That Tiber trembled underneath her banks,"  
"To hear the replication of your sounds"  
"Made in her concave shores?"  
"And do you now put on your best attire?"  
"And do you now cull out a holiday?"  
"And do you now strew flowers in his way"  
"That comes in triumph over Pompey's blood? Be gone!"  
"Run to your houses, fall upon your knees,"  
"Pray to the gods to intermit the plague"  
"That needs must light on this ingratitude."  
"Go, go, good countrymen, and, for this fault,"  
"Assemble all the poor men of your sort,"  
"Draw them to Tiber banks, and weep your tears"  
"Into the channel, till the lowest stream"  
"Do kiss the most exalted shores of all."  
"Exeunt all the Commoners"  
"See whether their basest metal be not moved,"  
"They vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness."  
"Go you down that way towards the Capitol,"  
"This way will I disrobe the images,"  
"If you do find them deck'd with ceremonies."  
"May we do so?"  
"You know it is the feast of Lupercal."  
"It is no matter, let no images"  
"Be hung with Caesar's trophies. I'll about,"  
"And drive away the vulgar from the streets:"  
"So do you too, where you perceive them thick."  
"These growing feathers pluck'd from Caesar's wing"  
"Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,"  
"Who else would soar above the view of men"  
"And keep us all in servile fearfulness."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. A public place."  
"Flourish. Enter CAESAR, ANTONY, for the course,  CALPURNIA, PORTIA, DECIUS BRUTUS, CICERO, BRUTUS,  CASSIUS, and CASCA, a great crowd following, among them a Soothsayer"  
Calpurnia!  
"Peace, ho! Caesar speaks."  
Calpurnia!  
"Here, my lord."  
"Stand you directly in Antonius' way,"  
"When he doth run his course. Antonius!"  
"Caesar, my lord?"  
"Forget not, in your speed, Antonius,"  
"To touch Calpurnia, for our elders say,"  
"The barren, touched in this holy chase,"  
"Shake off their sterile curse."  
"I shall remember:"  
"When Caesar says 'do this,' it is perform'd."  
"Set on, and leave no ceremony out."  
Flourish  
Caesar!  
"Ha! who calls?"  
"Bid every noise be still: peace yet again!"  
"Who is it in the press that calls on me?"  
"I hear a tongue, shriller than all the music,"  
"Cry 'Caesar!' Speak, Caesar is turn'd to hear."  
"Beware the ides of March."  
"What man is that?"  
"A soothsayer bids you beware the ides of March."  
"Set him before me, let me see his face."  
"Fellow, come from the throng, look upon Caesar."  
"What say'st thou to me now? speak once again."  
"Beware the ides of March."  
"He is a dreamer, let us leave him: pass."  
"Sennet. Exeunt all except BRUTUS and CASSIUS"  
"Will you go see the order of the course?"  
"Not I."  
"I pray you, do."  
"I am not gamesome: I do lack some part"  
"Of that quick spirit that is in Antony."  
"Let me not hinder, Cassius, your desires,"  
"I'll leave you."  
"Brutus, I do observe you now of late:"  
"I have not from your eyes that gentleness"  
"And show of love as I was wont to have:"  
"You bear too stubborn and too strange a hand"  
"Over your friend that loves you."  
Cassius,  
"Be not deceived: if I have veil'd my look,"  
"I turn the trouble of my countenance"  
"Merely upon myself. Vexed I am"  
"Of late with passions of some difference,"  
"Conceptions only proper to myself,"  
"Which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors,"  
"But let not therefore my good friends be grieved--"  
"Among which number, Cassius, be you one--"  
"Nor construe any further my neglect,"  
"Than that poor Brutus, with himself at war,"  
"Forgets the shows of love to other men."  
"Then, Brutus, I have much mistook your passion,"  
"By means whereof this breast of mine hath buried"  
"Thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations."  
"Tell me, good Brutus, can you see your face?"  
"No, Cassius, for the eye sees not itself,"  
"But by reflection, by some other things."  
"'Tis just:"  
"And it is very much lamented, Brutus,"  
"That you have no such mirrors as will turn"  
"Your hidden worthiness into your eye,"  
"That you might see your shadow. I have heard,"  
"Where many of the best respect in Rome,"  
"Except immortal Caesar, speaking of Brutus"  
"And groaning underneath this age's yoke,"  
"Have wish'd that noble Brutus had his eyes."  
"Into what dangers would you lead me, Cassius,"  
"That you would have me seek into myself"  
"For that which is not in me?"  
"Therefore, good Brutus, be prepared to hear:"  
"And since you know you cannot see yourself"  
"So well as by reflection, I, your glass,"  
"Will modestly discover to yourself"  
"That of yourself which you yet know not of."  
"And be not jealous on me, gentle Brutus:"  
"Were I a common laugher, or did use"  
"To stale with ordinary oaths my love"  
"To every new protester, if you know"  
"That I do fawn on men and hug them hard"  
"And after scandal them, or if you know"  
"That I profess myself in banqueting"  
"To all the rout, then hold me dangerous."  
"Flourish, and shout"  
"What means this shouting? I do fear, the people"  
"Choose Caesar for their king."  
"Ay, do you fear it?"  
"Then must I think you would not have it so."  
"I would not, Cassius, yet I love him well."  
"But wherefore do you hold me here so long?"  
"What is it that you would impart to me?"  
"If it be aught toward the general good,"  
"Set honour in one eye and death i' the other,"  
"And I will look on both indifferently,"  
"For let the gods so speed me as I love"  
"The name of honour more than I fear death."  
"I know that virtue to be in you, Brutus,"  
"As well as I do know your outward favour."  
"Well, honour is the subject of my story."  
"I cannot tell what you and other men"  
"Think of this life, but, for my single self,"  
"I had as lief not be as live to be"  
"In awe of such a thing as I myself."  
"I was born free as Caesar, so were you:"  
"We both have fed as well, and we can both"  
"Endure the winter's cold as well as he:"  
"For once, upon a raw and gusty day,"  
"The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores,"  
"Caesar said to me 'Darest thou, Cassius, now"  
"Leap in with me into this angry flood,"  
"And swim to yonder point?' Upon the word,"  
"Accoutred as I was, I plunged in"  
"And bade him follow, so indeed he did."  
"The torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it"  
"With lusty sinews, throwing it aside"  
"And stemming it with hearts of controversy,"  
"But ere we could arrive the point proposed,"  
"Caesar cried 'Help me, Cassius, or I sink!'"  
"I, as Aeneas, our great ancestor,"  
"Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder"  
"The old Anchises bear, so from the waves of Tiber"  
"Did I the tired Caesar. And this man"  
"Is now become a god, and Cassius is"  
"A wretched creature and must bend his body,"  
"If Caesar carelessly but nod on him."  
"He had a fever when he was in Spain,"  
"And when the fit was on him, I did mark"  
"How he did shake: 'tis true, this god did shake,"  
"His coward lips did from their colour fly,"  
"And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world"  
"Did lose his lustre: I did hear him groan:"  
"Ay, and that tongue of his that bade the Romans"  
"Mark him and write his speeches in their books,"  
"Alas, it cried 'Give me some drink, Titinius,'"  
"As a sick girl. Ye gods, it doth amaze me"  
"A man of such a feeble temper should"  
"So get the start of the majestic world"  
"And bear the palm alone."  
"Shout. Flourish"  
"Another general shout!"  
"I do believe that these applauses are"  
"For some new honours that are heap'd on Caesar."  
"Why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world"  
"Like a Colossus, and we petty men"  
"Walk under his huge legs and peep about"  
"To find ourselves dishonourable graves."  
"Men at some time are masters of their fates:"  
"The fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars,"  
"But in ourselves, that we are underlings."  
"Brutus and Caesar: what should be in that 'Caesar'?"  
"Why should that name be sounded more than yours?"  
"Write them together, yours is as fair a name,"  
"Sound them, it doth become the mouth as well,"  
"Weigh them, it is as heavy, conjure with 'em,"  
"Brutus will start a spirit as soon as Caesar."  
"Now, in the names of all the gods at once,"  
"Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed,"  
"That he is grown so great? Age, thou art shamed!"  
"Rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods!"  
"When went there by an age, since the great flood,"  
"But it was famed with more than with one man?"  
"When could they say till now, that talk'd of Rome,"  
"That her wide walls encompass'd but one man?"  
"Now is it Rome indeed and room enough,"  
"When there is in it but one only man."  
"O, you and I have heard our fathers say,"  
"There was a Brutus once that would have brook'd"  
"The eternal devil to keep his state in Rome"  
"As easily as a king."  
"That you do love me, I am nothing jealous,"  
"What you would work me to, I have some aim:"  
"How I have thought of this and of these times,"  
"I shall recount hereafter, for this present,"  
"I would not, so with love I might entreat you,"  
"Be any further moved. What you have said"  
"I will consider, what you have to say"  
"I will with patience hear, and find a time"  
"Both meet to hear and answer such high things."  
"Till then, my noble friend, chew upon this:"  
"Brutus had rather be a villager"  
"Than to repute himself a son of Rome"  
"Under these hard conditions as this time"  
"Is like to lay upon us."  
"I am glad that my weak words"  
"Have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus."  
"The games are done and Caesar is returning."  
"As they pass by, pluck Casca by the sleeve,"  
"And he will, after his sour fashion, tell you"  
"What hath proceeded worthy note to-day."  
"Re-enter CAESAR and his Train"  
"I will do so. But, look you, Cassius,"  
"The angry spot doth glow on Caesar's brow,"  
"And all the rest look like a chidden train:"  
"Calpurnia's cheek is pale, and Cicero"  
"Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes"  
"As we have seen him in the Capitol,"  
"Being cross'd in conference by some senators."  
"Casca will tell us what the matter is."  
Antonius!  
Caesar?  
"Let me have men about me that are fat,"  
"Sleek-headed men and such as sleep o' nights:"  
"Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look,"  
"He thinks too much: such men are dangerous."  
"Fear him not, Caesar, he's not dangerous,"  
"He is a noble Roman and well given."  
"Would he were fatter! But I fear him not:"  
"Yet if my name were liable to fear,"  
"I do not know the man I should avoid"  
"So soon as that spare Cassius. He reads much,"  
"He is a great observer and he looks"  
"Quite through the deeds of men: he loves no plays,"  
"As thou dost, Antony, he hears no music,"  
"Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort"  
"As if he mock'd himself and scorn'd his spirit"  
"That could be moved to smile at any thing."  
"Such men as he be never at heart's ease"  
"Whiles they behold a greater than themselves,"  
"And therefore are they very dangerous."  
"I rather tell thee what is to be fear'd"  
"Than what I fear, for always I am Caesar."  
"Come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf,"  
"And tell me truly what thou think'st of him."  
"Sennet. Exeunt CAESAR and all his Train, but CASCA"  
"You pull'd me by the cloak, would you speak with me?"  
"Ay, Casca, tell us what hath chanced to-day,"  
"That Caesar looks so sad."  
"Why, you were with him, were you not?"  
"I should not then ask Casca what had chanced."  
"Why, there was a crown offered him: and being"  
"offered him, he put it by with the back of his hand,"  
"thus, and then the people fell a-shouting."  
"What was the second noise for?"  
"Why, for that too."  
"They shouted thrice: what was the last cry for?"  
"Why, for that too."  
"Was the crown offered him thrice?"  
"Ay, marry, was't, and he put it by thrice, every"  
"time gentler than other, and at every putting-by"  
"mine honest neighbours shouted."  
"Who offered him the crown?"  
"Why, Antony."  
"Tell us the manner of it, gentle Casca."  
"I can as well be hanged as tell the manner of it:"  
"it was mere foolery, I did not mark it. I saw Mark"  
"Antony offer him a crown,--yet 'twas not a crown"  
"neither, 'twas one of these coronets,--and, as I told"  
"you, he put it by once: but, for all that, to my"  
"thinking, he would fain have had it. Then he"  
"offered it to him again, then he put it by again:"  
"but, to my thinking, he was very loath to lay his"  
"fingers off it. And then he offered it the third"  
"time, he put it the third time by: and still as he"  
"refused it, the rabblement hooted and clapped their"  
"chapped hands and threw up their sweaty night-caps"  
"and uttered such a deal of stinking breath because"  
"Caesar refused the crown that it had almost choked"  
"Caesar, for he swounded and fell down at it: and"  
"for mine own part, I durst not laugh, for fear of"  
"opening my lips and receiving the bad air."  
"But, soft, I pray you: what, did Caesar swound?"  
"He fell down in the market-place, and foamed at"  
"mouth, and was speechless."  
"'Tis very like: he hath the failing sickness."  
"No, Caesar hath it not, but you and I,"  
"And honest Casca, we have the falling sickness."  
"I know not what you mean by that, but, I am sure,"  
"Caesar fell down. If the tag-rag people did not"  
"clap him and hiss him, according as he pleased and"  
"displeased them, as they use to do the players in"  
"the theatre, I am no true man."  
"What said he when he came unto himself?"  
"Marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the"  
"common herd was glad he refused the crown, he"  
"plucked me ope his doublet and offered them his"  
"throat to cut. An I had been a man of any"  
"occupation, if I would not have taken him at a word,"  
"I would I might go to hell among the rogues. And so"  
"he fell. When he came to himself again, he said,"  
"If he had done or said any thing amiss, he desired"  
"their worships to think it was his infirmity. Three"  
"or four wenches, where I stood, cried 'Alas, good"  
"soul!' and forgave him with all their hearts: but"  
"there's no heed to be taken of them, if Caesar had"  
"stabbed their mothers, they would have done no less."  
"And after that, he came, thus sad, away?"  
Ay.  
"Did Cicero say any thing?"  
"Ay, he spoke Greek."  
"To what effect?"  
"Nay, an I tell you that, Ill ne'er look you i' the"  
"face again: but those that understood him smiled at"  
"one another and shook their heads, but, for mine own"  
"part, it was Greek to me. I could tell you more"  
"news too: Marullus and Flavius, for pulling scarfs"  
"off Caesar's images, are put to silence. Fare you"  
"well. There was more foolery yet, if I could"  
"remember it."  
"Will you sup with me to-night, Casca?"  
"No, I am promised forth."  
"Will you dine with me to-morrow?"  
"Ay, if I be alive and your mind hold and your dinner"  
"worth the eating."  
"Good: I will expect you."  
"Do so. Farewell, both."  
Exit  
"What a blunt fellow is this grown to be!"  
"He was quick mettle when he went to school."  
"So is he now in execution"  
"Of any bold or noble enterprise,"  
"However he puts on this tardy form."  
"This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit,"  
"Which gives men stomach to digest his words"  
"With better appetite."  
"And so it is. For this time I will leave you:"  
"To-morrow, if you please to speak with me,"  
"I will come home to you, or, if you will,"  
"Come home to me, and I will wait for you."  
"I will do so: till then, think of the world."  
"Exit BRUTUS"  
"Well, Brutus, thou art noble, yet, I see,"  
"Thy honourable metal may be wrought"  
"From that it is disposed: therefore it is meet"  
"That noble minds keep ever with their likes,"  
"For who so firm that cannot be seduced?"  
"Caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves Brutus:"  
"If I were Brutus now and he were Cassius,"  
"He should not humour me. I will this night,"  
"In several hands, in at his windows throw,"  
"As if they came from several citizens,"  
"Writings all tending to the great opinion"  
"That Rome holds of his name, wherein obscurely"  
"Caesar's ambition shall be glanced at:"  
"And after this let Caesar seat him sure,"  
"For we will shake him, or worse days endure."  
Exit  
"SCENE III. The same. A street."  
"Thunder and lightning. Enter from opposite sides, CASCA, with his sword drawn, and CICERO"  
"Good even, Casca: brought you Caesar home?"  
"Why are you breathless? and why stare you so?"  
"Are not you moved, when all the sway of earth"  
"Shakes like a thing unfirm? O Cicero,"  
"I have seen tempests, when the scolding winds"  
"Have rived the knotty oaks, and I have seen"  
"The ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam,"  
"To be exalted with the threatening clouds:"  
"But never till to-night, never till now,"  
"Did I go through a tempest dropping fire."  
"Either there is a civil strife in heaven,"  
"Or else the world, too saucy with the gods,"  
"Incenses them to send destruction."  
"Why, saw you any thing more wonderful?"  
"A common slave--you know him well by sight--"  
"Held up his left hand, which did flame and burn"  
"Like twenty torches join'd, and yet his hand,"  
"Not sensible of fire, remain'd unscorch'd."  
"Besides--I ha' not since put up my sword--"  
"Against the Capitol I met a lion,"  
"Who glared upon me, and went surly by,"  
"Without annoying me: and there were drawn"  
"Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women,"  
"Transformed with their fear, who swore they saw"  
"Men all in fire walk up and down the streets."  
"And yesterday the bird of night did sit"  
"Even at noon-day upon the market-place,"  
"Hooting and shrieking. When these prodigies"  
"Do so conjointly meet, let not men say"  
"'These are their reasons, they are natural,'"  
"For, I believe, they are portentous things"  
"Unto the climate that they point upon."  
"Indeed, it is a strange-disposed time:"  
"But men may construe things after their fashion,"  
"Clean from the purpose of the things themselves."  
"Come Caesar to the Capitol to-morrow?"  
"He doth, for he did bid Antonius"  
"Send word to you he would be there to-morrow."  
"Good night then, Casca: this disturbed sky"  
"Is not to walk in."  
"Farewell, Cicero."  
"Exit CICERO"  
"Enter CASSIUS"  
"Who's there?"  
"A Roman."  
"Casca, by your voice."  
"Your ear is good. Cassius, what night is this!"  
"A very pleasing night to honest men."  
"Who ever knew the heavens menace so?"  
"Those that have known the earth so full of faults."  
"For my part, I have walk'd about the streets,"  
"Submitting me unto the perilous night,"  
"And, thus unbraced, Casca, as you see,"  
"Have bared my bosom to the thunder-stone,"  
"And when the cross blue lightning seem'd to open"  
"The breast of heaven, I did present myself"  
"Even in the aim and very flash of it."  
"But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens?"  
"It is the part of men to fear and tremble,"  
"When the most mighty gods by tokens send"  
"Such dreadful heralds to astonish us."  
"You are dull, Casca, and those sparks of life"  
"That should be in a Roman you do want,"  
"Or else you use not. You look pale and gaze"  
"And put on fear and cast yourself in wonder,"  
"To see the strange impatience of the heavens:"  
"But if you would consider the true cause"  
"Why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts,"  
"Why birds and beasts from quality and kind,"  
"Why old men fool and children calculate,"  
"Why all these things change from their ordinance"  
"Their natures and preformed faculties"  
"To monstrous quality,--why, you shall find"  
"That heaven hath infused them with these spirits,"  
"To make them instruments of fear and warning"  
"Unto some monstrous state."  
"Now could I, Casca, name to thee a man"  
"Most like this dreadful night,"  
"That thunders, lightens, opens graves, and roars"  
"As doth the lion in the Capitol,"  
"A man no mightier than thyself or me"  
"In personal action, yet prodigious grown"  
"And fearful, as these strange eruptions are."  
"'Tis Caesar that you mean, is it not, Cassius?"  
"Let it be who it is: for Romans now"  
"Have thews and limbs like to their ancestors,"  
"But, woe the while! our fathers' minds are dead,"  
"And we are govern'd with our mothers' spirits,"  
"Our yoke and sufferance show us womanish."  
"Indeed, they say the senators tomorrow"  
"Mean to establish Caesar as a king,"  
"And he shall wear his crown by sea and land,"  
"In every place, save here in Italy."  
"I know where I will wear this dagger then,"  
"Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius:"  
"Therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong,"  
"Therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat:"  
"Nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass,"  
"Nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron,"  
"Can be retentive to the strength of spirit,"  
"But life, being weary of these worldly bars,"  
"Never lacks power to dismiss itself."  
"If I know this, know all the world besides,"  
"That part of tyranny that I do bear"  
"I can shake off at pleasure."  
"Thunder still"  
"So can I:"  
"So every bondman in his own hand bears"  
"The power to cancel his captivity."  
"And why should Caesar be a tyrant then?"  
"Poor man! I know he would not be a wolf,"  
"But that he sees the Romans are but sheep:"  
"He were no lion, were not Romans hinds."  
"Those that with haste will make a mighty fire"  
"Begin it with weak straws: what trash is Rome,"  
"What rubbish and what offal, when it serves"  
"For the base matter to illuminate"  
"So vile a thing as Caesar! But, O grief,"  
"Where hast thou led me? I perhaps speak this"  
"Before a willing bondman, then I know"  
"My answer must be made. But I am arm'd,"  
"And dangers are to me indifferent."  
"You speak to Casca, and to such a man"  
"That is no fleering tell-tale. Hold, my hand:"  
"Be factious for redress of all these griefs,"  
"And I will set this foot of mine as far"  
"As who goes farthest."  
"There's a bargain made."  
"Now know you, Casca, I have moved already"  
"Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans"  
"To undergo with me an enterprise"  
"Of honourable-dangerous consequence,"  
"And I do know, by this, they stay for me"  
"In Pompey's porch: for now, this fearful night,"  
"There is no stir or walking in the streets,"  
"And the complexion of the element"  
"In favour's like the work we have in hand,"  
"Most bloody, fiery, and most terrible."  
"Stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste."  
"'Tis Cinna, I do know him by his gait,"  
"He is a friend."  
"Enter CINNA"  
"Cinna, where haste you so?"  
"To find out you. Who's that? Metellus Cimber?"  
"No, it is Casca, one incorporate"  
"To our attempts. Am I not stay'd for, Cinna?"  
"I am glad on 't. What a fearful night is this!"  
"There's two or three of us have seen strange sights."  
"Am I not stay'd for? tell me."  
"Yes, you are."  
"O Cassius, if you could"  
"But win the noble Brutus to our party--"  
"Be you content: good Cinna, take this paper,"  
"And look you lay it in the praetor's chair,"  
"Where Brutus may but find it, and throw this"  
"In at his window, set this up with wax"  
"Upon old Brutus' statue: all this done,"  
"Repair to Pompey's porch, where you shall find us."  
"Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there?"  
"All but Metellus Cimber, and he's gone"  
"To seek you at your house. Well, I will hie,"  
"And so bestow these papers as you bade me."  
"That done, repair to Pompey's theatre."  
"Exit CINNA"  
"Come, Casca, you and I will yet ere day"  
"See Brutus at his house: three parts of him"  
"Is ours already, and the man entire"  
"Upon the next encounter yields him ours."  
"O, he sits high in all the people's hearts:"  
"And that which would appear offence in us,"  
"His countenance, like richest alchemy,"  
"Will change to virtue and to worthiness."  
"Him and his worth and our great need of him"  
"You have right well conceited. Let us go,"  
"For it is after midnight, and ere day"  
"We will awake him and be sure of him."  
Exeunt  
"ACT II"  
"SCENE I. Rome. BRUTUS's orchard."  
"Enter BRUTUS"  
"What, Lucius, ho!"  
"I cannot, by the progress of the stars,"  
"Give guess how near to day. Lucius, I say!"  
"I would it were my fault to sleep so soundly."  
"When, Lucius, when? awake, I say! what, Lucius!"  
"Enter LUCIUS"  
"Call'd you, my lord?"  
"Get me a taper in my study, Lucius:"  
"When it is lighted, come and call me here."  
"I will, my lord."  
Exit  
"It must be by his death: and for my part,"  
"I know no personal cause to spurn at him,"  
"But for the general. He would be crown'd:"  
"How that might change his nature, there's the question."  
"It is the bright day that brings forth the adder,"  
"And that craves wary walking. Crown him?--that,--"  
"And then, I grant, we put a sting in him,"  
"That at his will he may do danger with."  
"The abuse of greatness is, when it disjoins"  
"Remorse from power: and, to speak truth of Caesar,"  
"I have not known when his affections sway'd"  
"More than his reason. But 'tis a common proof,"  
"That lowliness is young ambition's ladder,"  
"Whereto the climber-upward turns his face,"  
"But when he once attains the upmost round."  
"He then unto the ladder turns his back,"  
"Looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees"  
"By which he did ascend. So Caesar may."  
"Then, lest he may, prevent. And, since the quarrel"  
"Will bear no colour for the thing he is,"  
"Fashion it thus, that what he is, augmented,"  
"Would run to these and these extremities:"  
"And therefore think him as a serpent's egg"  
"Which, hatch'd, would, as his kind, grow mischievous,"  
"And kill him in the shell."  
"Re-enter LUCIUS"  
"The taper burneth in your closet, sir."  
"Searching the window for a flint, I found"  
"This paper, thus seal'd up, and, I am sure,"  
"It did not lie there when I went to bed."  
"Gives him the letter"  
"Get you to bed again, it is not day."  
"Is not to-morrow, boy, the ides of March?"  
"I know not, sir."  
"Look in the calendar, and bring me word."  
"I will, sir."  
Exit  
"The exhalations whizzing in the air"  
"Give so much light that I may read by them."  
"Opens the letter and reads"  
"'Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake, and see thyself."  
"Shall Rome,  and c. Speak, strike, redress!"  
"Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake!'"  
"Such instigations have been often dropp'd"  
"Where I have took them up."  
"'Shall Rome,  and c.' Thus must I piece it out:"  
"Shall Rome stand under one man's awe? What, Rome?"  
"My ancestors did from the streets of Rome"  
"The Tarquin drive, when he was call'd a king."  
"'Speak, strike, redress!' Am I entreated"  
"To speak and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise:"  
"If the redress will follow, thou receivest"  
"Thy full petition at the hand of Brutus!"  
"Re-enter LUCIUS"  
"Sir, March is wasted fourteen days."  
"Knocking within"  
"'Tis good. Go to the gate, somebody knocks."  
"Exit LUCIUS"  
"Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar,"  
"I have not slept."  
"Between the acting of a dreadful thing"  
"And the first motion, all the interim is"  
"Like a phantasma, or a hideous dream:"  
"The Genius and the mortal instruments"  
"Are then in council, and the state of man,"  
"Like to a little kingdom, suffers then"  
"The nature of an insurrection."  
"Re-enter LUCIUS"  
"Sir, 'tis your brother Cassius at the door,"  
"Who doth desire to see you."  
"Is he alone?"  
"No, sir, there are moe with him."  
"Do you know them?"  
"No, sir, their hats are pluck'd about their ears,"  
"And half their faces buried in their cloaks,"  
"That by no means I may discover them"  
"By any mark of favour."  
"Let 'em enter."  
"Exit LUCIUS"  
"They are the faction. O conspiracy,"  
"Shamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by night,"  
"When evils are most free? O, then by day"  
"Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough"  
"To mask thy monstrous visage? Seek none, conspiracy,"  
"Hide it in smiles and affability:"  
"For if thou path, thy native semblance on,"  
"Not Erebus itself were dim enough"  
"To hide thee from prevention."  
"Enter the conspirators, CASSIUS, CASCA, DECIUS BRUTUS, CINNA, METELLUS CIMBER, and TREBONIUS"  
"I think we are too bold upon your rest:"  
"Good morrow, Brutus, do we trouble you?"  
"I have been up this hour, awake all night."  
"Know I these men that come along with you?"  
"Yes, every man of them, and no man here"  
"But honours you, and every one doth wish"  
"You had but that opinion of yourself"  
"Which every noble Roman bears of you."  
"This is Trebonius."  
"He is welcome hither."  
"This, Decius Brutus."  
"He is welcome too."  
"This, Casca, this, Cinna, and this, Metellus Cimber."  
"They are all welcome."  
"What watchful cares do interpose themselves"  
"Betwixt your eyes and night?"  
"Shall I entreat a word?"  
"BRUTUS and CASSIUS whisper"  
"Here lies the east: doth not the day break here?"  
No.  
"O, pardon, sir, it doth, and yon gray lines"  
"That fret the clouds are messengers of day."  
"You shall confess that you are both deceived."  
"Here, as I point my sword, the sun arises,"  
"Which is a great way growing on the south,"  
"Weighing the youthful season of the year."  
"Some two months hence up higher toward the north"  
"He first presents his fire, and the high east"  
"Stands, as the Capitol, directly here."  
"Give me your hands all over, one by one."  
"And let us swear our resolution."  
"No, not an oath: if not the face of men,"  
"The sufferance of our souls, the time's abuse,--"  
"If these be motives weak, break off betimes,"  
"And every man hence to his idle bed,"  
"So let high-sighted tyranny range on,"  
"Till each man drop by lottery. But if these,"  
"As I am sure they do, bear fire enough"  
"To kindle cowards and to steel with valour"  
"The melting spirits of women, then, countrymen,"  
"What need we any spur but our own cause,"  
"To prick us to redress? what other bond"  
"Than secret Romans, that have spoke the word,"  
"And will not palter? and what other oath"  
"Than honesty to honesty engaged,"  
"That this shall be, or we will fall for it?"  
"Swear priests and cowards and men cautelous,"  
"Old feeble carrions and such suffering souls"  
"That welcome wrongs, unto bad causes swear"  
"Such creatures as men doubt, but do not stain"  
"The even virtue of our enterprise,"  
"Nor the insuppressive mettle of our spirits,"  
"To think that or our cause or our performance"  
"Did need an oath, when every drop of blood"  
"That every Roman bears, and nobly bears,"  
"Is guilty of a several bastardy,"  
"If he do break the smallest particle"  
"Of any promise that hath pass'd from him."  
"But what of Cicero? shall we sound him?"  
"I think he will stand very strong with us."  
"Let us not leave him out."  
"No, by no means."  
"O, let us have him, for his silver hairs"  
"Will purchase us a good opinion"  
"And buy men's voices to commend our deeds:"  
"It shall be said, his judgment ruled our hands,"  
"Our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,"  
"But all be buried in his gravity."  
"O, name him not: let us not break with him,"  
"For he will never follow any thing"  
"That other men begin."  
"Then leave him out."  
"Indeed he is not fit."  
"Shall no man else be touch'd but only Caesar?"  
"Decius, well urged: I think it is not meet,"  
"Mark Antony, so well beloved of Caesar,"  
"Should outlive Caesar: we shall find of him"  
"A shrewd contriver, and, you know, his means,"  
"If he improve them, may well stretch so far"  
"As to annoy us all: which to prevent,"  
"Let Antony and Caesar fall together."  
"Our course will seem too bloody, Caius Cassius,"  
"To cut the head off and then hack the limbs,"  
"Like wrath in death and envy afterwards,"  
"For Antony is but a limb of Caesar:"  
"Let us be sacrificers, but not butchers, Caius."  
"We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar,"  
"And in the spirit of men there is no blood:"  
"O, that we then could come by Caesar's spirit,"  
"And not dismember Caesar! But, alas,"  
"Caesar must bleed for it! And, gentle friends,"  
"Let's kill him boldly, but not wrathfully,"  
"Let's carve him as a dish fit for the gods,"  
"Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds:"  
"And let our hearts, as subtle masters do,"  
"Stir up their servants to an act of rage,"  
"And after seem to chide 'em. This shall make"  
"Our purpose necessary and not envious:"  
"Which so appearing to the common eyes,"  
"We shall be call'd purgers, not murderers."  
"And for Mark Antony, think not of him,"  
"For he can do no more than Caesar's arm"  
"When Caesar's head is off."  
"Yet I fear him,"  
"For in the ingrafted love he bears to Caesar--"  
"Alas, good Cassius, do not think of him:"  
"If he love Caesar, all that he can do"  
"Is to himself, take thought and die for Caesar:"  
"And that were much he should, for he is given"  
"To sports, to wildness and much company."  
"There is no fear in him, let him not die,"  
"For he will live, and laugh at this hereafter."  
"Clock strikes"  
"Peace! count the clock."  
"The clock hath stricken three."  
"'Tis time to part."  
"But it is doubtful yet,"  
"Whether Caesar will come forth to-day, or no,"  
"For he is superstitious grown of late,"  
"Quite from the main opinion he held once"  
"Of fantasy, of dreams and ceremonies:"  
"It may be, these apparent prodigies,"  
"The unaccustom'd terror of this night,"  
"And the persuasion of his augurers,"  
"May hold him from the Capitol to-day."  
"Never fear that: if he be so resolved,"  
"I can o'ersway him, for he loves to hear"  
"That unicorns may be betray'd with trees,"  
"And bears with glasses, elephants with holes,"  
"Lions with toils and men with flatterers,"  
"But when I tell him he hates flatterers,"  
"He says he does, being then most flattered."  
"Let me work,"  
"For I can give his humour the true bent,"  
"And I will bring him to the Capitol."  
"Nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him."  
"By the eighth hour: is that the uttermost?"  
"Be that the uttermost, and fail not then."  
"Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard,"  
"Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey:"  
"I wonder none of you have thought of him."  
"Now, good Metellus, go along by him:"  
"He loves me well, and I have given him reasons,"  
"Send him but hither, and I'll fashion him."  
"The morning comes upon 's: we'll leave you, Brutus."  
"And, friends, disperse yourselves, but all remember"  
"What you have said, and show yourselves true Romans."  
"Good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily,"  
"Let not our looks put on our purposes,"  
"But bear it as our Roman actors do,"  
"With untired spirits and formal constancy:"  
"And so good morrow to you every one."  
"Exeunt all but BRUTUS"  
"Boy! Lucius! Fast asleep? It is no matter,"  
"Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber:"  
"Thou hast no figures nor no fantasies,"  
"Which busy care draws in the brains of men,"  
"Therefore thou sleep'st so sound."  
"Enter PORTIA"  
"Brutus, my lord!"  
"Portia, what mean you? wherefore rise you now?"  
"It is not for your health thus to commit"  
"Your weak condition to the raw cold morning."  
"Nor for yours neither. You've ungently, Brutus,"  
"Stole from my bed: and yesternight, at supper,"  
"You suddenly arose, and walk'd about,"  
"Musing and sighing, with your arms across,"  
"And when I ask'd you what the matter was,"  
"You stared upon me with ungentle looks,"  
"I urged you further, then you scratch'd your head,"  
"And too impatiently stamp'd with your foot,"  
"Yet I insisted, yet you answer'd not,"  
"But, with an angry wafture of your hand,"  
"Gave sign for me to leave you: so I did,"  
"Fearing to strengthen that impatience"  
"Which seem'd too much enkindled, and withal"  
"Hoping it was but an effect of humour,"  
"Which sometime hath his hour with every man."  
"It will not let you eat, nor talk, nor sleep,"  
"And could it work so much upon your shape"  
"As it hath much prevail'd on your condition,"  
"I should not know you, Brutus. Dear my lord,"  
"Make me acquainted with your cause of grief."  
"I am not well in health, and that is all."  
"Brutus is wise, and, were he not in health,"  
"He would embrace the means to come by it."  
"Why, so I do. Good Portia, go to bed."  
"Is Brutus sick? and is it physical"  
"To walk unbraced and suck up the humours"  
"Of the dank morning? What, is Brutus sick,"  
"And will he steal out of his wholesome bed,"  
"To dare the vile contagion of the night"  
"And tempt the rheumy and unpurged air"  
"To add unto his sickness? No, my Brutus,"  
"You have some sick offence within your mind,"  
"Which, by the right and virtue of my place,"  
"I ought to know of: and, upon my knees,"  
"I charm you, by my once-commended beauty,"  
"By all your vows of love and that great vow"  
"Which did incorporate and make us one,"  
"That you unfold to me, yourself, your half,"  
"Why you are heavy, and what men to-night"  
"Have had to resort to you: for here have been"  
"Some six or seven, who did hide their faces"  
"Even from darkness."  
"Kneel not, gentle Portia."  
"I should not need, if you were gentle Brutus."  
"Within the bond of marriage, tell me, Brutus,"  
"Is it excepted I should know no secrets"  
"That appertain to you? Am I yourself"  
"But, as it were, in sort or limitation,"  
"To keep with you at meals, comfort your bed,"  
"And talk to you sometimes? Dwell I but in the suburbs"  
"Of your good pleasure? If it be no more,"  
"Portia is Brutus' harlot, not his wife."  
"You are my true and honourable wife,"  
"As dear to me as are the ruddy drops"  
"That visit my sad heart"  
"If this were true, then should I know this secret."  
"I grant I am a woman, but withal"  
"A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife:"  
"I grant I am a woman, but withal"  
"A woman well-reputed, Cato's daughter."  
"Think you I am no stronger than my sex,"  
"Being so father'd and so husbanded?"  
"Tell me your counsels, I will not disclose 'em:"  
"I have made strong proof of my constancy,"  
"Giving myself a voluntary wound"  
"Here, in the thigh: can I bear that with patience."  
"And not my husband's secrets?"  
"O ye gods,"  
"Render me worthy of this noble wife!"  
"Knocking within"  
"Hark, hark! one knocks: Portia, go in awhile,"  
"And by and by thy bosom shall partake"  
"The secrets of my heart."  
"All my engagements I will construe to thee,"  
"All the charactery of my sad brows:"  
"Leave me with haste."  
"Exit PORTIA"  
"Lucius, who's that knocks?"  
"Re-enter LUCIUS with LIGARIUS"  
"He is a sick man that would speak with you."  
"Caius Ligarius, that Metellus spake of."  
"Boy, stand aside. Caius Ligarius! how?"  
"Vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue."  
"O, what a time have you chose out, brave Caius,"  
"To wear a kerchief! Would you were not sick!"  
"I am not sick, if Brutus have in hand"  
"Any exploit worthy the name of honour."  
"Such an exploit have I in hand, Ligarius,"  
"Had you a healthful ear to hear of it."  
"By all the gods that Romans bow before,"  
"I here discard my sickness! Soul of Rome!"  
"Brave son, derived from honourable loins!"  
"Thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up"  
"My mortified spirit. Now bid me run,"  
"And I will strive with things impossible,"  
"Yea, get the better of them. What's to do?"  
"A piece of work that will make sick men whole."  
"But are not some whole that we must make sick?"  
"That must we also. What it is, my Caius,"  
"I shall unfold to thee, as we are going"  
"To whom it must be done."  
"Set on your foot,"  
"And with a heart new-fired I follow you,"  
"To do I know not what: but it sufficeth"  
"That Brutus leads me on."  
"Follow me, then."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. CAESAR's house."  
"Thunder and lightning. Enter CAESAR, in his night-gown"  
"Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace to-night:"  
"Thrice hath Calpurnia in her sleep cried out,"  
"'Help, ho! they murder Caesar!' Who's within?"  
"Enter a Servant"  
"My lord?"  
"Go bid the priests do present sacrifice"  
"And bring me their opinions of success."  
"I will, my lord."  
Exit  
"Enter CALPURNIA"  
"What mean you, Caesar? think you to walk forth?"  
"You shall not stir out of your house to-day."  
"Caesar shall forth: the things that threaten'd me"  
"Ne'er look'd but on my back, when they shall see"  
"The face of Caesar, they are vanished."  
"Caesar, I never stood on ceremonies,"  
"Yet now they fright me. There is one within,"  
"Besides the things that we have heard and seen,"  
"Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch."  
"A lioness hath whelped in the streets,"  
"And graves have yawn'd, and yielded up their dead,"  
"Fierce fiery warriors fought upon the clouds,"  
"In ranks and squadrons and right form of war,"  
"Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol,"  
"The noise of battle hurtled in the air,"  
"Horses did neigh, and dying men did groan,"  
"And ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets."  
"O Caesar! these things are beyond all use,"  
"And I do fear them."  
"What can be avoided"  
"Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods?"  
"Yet Caesar shall go forth, for these predictions"  
"Are to the world in general as to Caesar."  
"When beggars die, there are no comets seen,"  
"The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes."  
"Cowards die many times before their deaths,"  
"The valiant never taste of death but once."  
"Of all the wonders that I yet have heard."  
"It seems to me most strange that men should fear,"  
"Seeing that death, a necessary end,"  
"Will come when it will come."  
"Re-enter Servant"  
"What say the augurers?"  
"They would not have you to stir forth to-day."  
"Plucking the entrails of an offering forth,"  
"They could not find a heart within the beast."  
"The gods do this in shame of cowardice:"  
"Caesar should be a beast without a heart,"  
"If he should stay at home to-day for fear."  
"No, Caesar shall not: danger knows full well"  
"That Caesar is more dangerous than he:"  
"We are two lions litter'd in one day,"  
"And I the elder and more terrible:"  
"And Caesar shall go forth."  
"Alas, my lord,"  
"Your wisdom is consumed in confidence."  
"Do not go forth to-day: call it my fear"  
"That keeps you in the house, and not your own."  
"We'll send Mark Antony to the senate-house:"  
"And he shall say you are not well to-day:"  
"Let me, upon my knee, prevail in this."  
"Mark Antony shall say I am not well,"  
"And, for thy humour, I will stay at home."  
"Enter DECIUS BRUTUS"  
"Here's Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so."  
"Caesar, all hail! good morrow, worthy Caesar:"  
"I come to fetch you to the senate-house."  
"And you are come in very happy time,"  
"To bear my greeting to the senators"  
"And tell them that I will not come to-day:"  
"Cannot, is false, and that I dare not, falser:"  
"I will not come to-day: tell them so, Decius."  
"Say he is sick."  
"Shall Caesar send a lie?"  
"Have I in conquest stretch'd mine arm so far,"  
"To be afraid to tell graybeards the truth?"  
"Decius, go tell them Caesar will not come."  
"Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,"  
"Lest I be laugh'd at when I tell them so."  
"The cause is in my will: I will not come,"  
"That is enough to satisfy the senate."  
"But for your private satisfaction,"  
"Because I love you, I will let you know:"  
"Calpurnia here, my wife, stays me at home:"  
"She dreamt to-night she saw my statua,"  
"Which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts,"  
"Did run pure blood: and many lusty Romans"  
"Came smiling, and did bathe their hands in it:"  
"And these does she apply for warnings, and portents,"  
"And evils imminent, and on her knee"  
"Hath begg'd that I will stay at home to-day."  
"This dream is all amiss interpreted,"  
"It was a vision fair and fortunate:"  
"Your statue spouting blood in many pipes,"  
"In which so many smiling Romans bathed,"  
"Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck"  
"Reviving blood, and that great men shall press"  
"For tinctures, stains, relics and cognizance."  
"This by Calpurnia's dream is signified."  
"And this way have you well expounded it."  
"I have, when you have heard what I can say:"  
"And know it now: the senate have concluded"  
"To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar."  
"If you shall send them word you will not come,"  
"Their minds may change. Besides, it were a mock"  
"Apt to be render'd, for some one to say"  
"'Break up the senate till another time,"  
"When Caesar's wife shall meet with better dreams.'"  
"If Caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper"  
"'Lo, Caesar is afraid'?"  
"Pardon me, Caesar, for my dear dear love"  
"To our proceeding bids me tell you this,"  
"And reason to my love is liable."  
"How foolish do your fears seem now, Calpurnia!"  
"I am ashamed I did yield to them."  
"Give me my robe, for I will go."  
"Enter PUBLIUS, BRUTUS, LIGARIUS, METELLUS, CASCA, TREBONIUS, and CINNA"  
"And look where Publius is come to fetch me."  
"Good morrow, Caesar."  
"Welcome, Publius."  
"What, Brutus, are you stirr'd so early too?"  
"Good morrow, Casca. Caius Ligarius,"  
"Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy"  
"As that same ague which hath made you lean."  
"What is 't o'clock?"  
"Caesar, 'tis strucken eight."  
"I thank you for your pains and courtesy."  
"Enter ANTONY"  
"See! Antony, that revels long o' nights,"  
"Is notwithstanding up. Good morrow, Antony."  
"So to most noble Caesar."  
"Bid them prepare within:"  
"I am to blame to be thus waited for."  
"Now, Cinna: now, Metellus: what, Trebonius!"  
"I have an hour's talk in store for you,"  
"Remember that you call on me to-day:"  
"Be near me, that I may remember you."  
"Caesar, I will:"  
Aside  
"and so near will I be,"  
"That your best friends shall wish I had been further."  
"Good friends, go in, and taste some wine with me,"  
"And we, like friends, will straightway go together."  
"[Aside]  That every like is not the same, O Caesar,"  
"The heart of Brutus yearns to think upon!"  
Exeunt  
"SCENE III. A street near the Capitol."  
"Enter ARTEMIDORUS, reading a paper"  
"'Caesar, beware of Brutus, take heed of Cassius,"  
"come not near Casca, have an eye to Cinna, trust not"  
"Trebonius: mark well Metellus Cimber: Decius Brutus"  
"loves thee not: thou hast wronged Caius Ligarius."  
"There is but one mind in all these men, and it is"  
"bent against Caesar. If thou beest not immortal,"  
"look about you: security gives way to conspiracy."  
"The mighty gods defend thee! Thy lover,"  
'ARTEMIDORUS.'  
"Here will I stand till Caesar pass along,"  
"And as a suitor will I give him this."  
"My heart laments that virtue cannot live"  
"Out of the teeth of emulation."  
"If thou read this, O Caesar, thou mayst live,"  
"If not, the Fates with traitors do contrive."  
Exit  
"SCENE IV. Another part of the same street, before the house of BRUTUS."  
"Enter PORTIA and LUCIUS"  
"I prithee, boy, run to the senate-house,"  
"Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone:"  
"Why dost thou stay?"  
"To know my errand, madam."  
"I would have had thee there, and here again,"  
"Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there."  
"O constancy, be strong upon my side,"  
"Set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongue!"  
"I have a man's mind, but a woman's might."  
"How hard it is for women to keep counsel!"  
"Art thou here yet?"  
"Madam, what should I do?"  
"Run to the Capitol, and nothing else?"  
"And so return to you, and nothing else?"  
"Yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well,"  
"For he went sickly forth: and take good note"  
"What Caesar doth, what suitors press to him."  
"Hark, boy! what noise is that?"  
"I hear none, madam."  
"Prithee, listen well,"  
"I heard a bustling rumour, like a fray,"  
"And the wind brings it from the Capitol."  
"Sooth, madam, I hear nothing."  
"Enter the Soothsayer"  
"Come hither, fellow: which way hast thou been?"  
"At mine own house, good lady."  
"What is't o'clock?"  
"About the ninth hour, lady."  
"Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol?"  
"Madam, not yet: I go to take my stand,"  
"To see him pass on to the Capitol."  
"Thou hast some suit to Caesar, hast thou not?"  
"That I have, lady: if it will please Caesar"  
"To be so good to Caesar as to hear me,"  
"I shall beseech him to befriend himself."  
"Why, know'st thou any harm's intended towards him?"  
"None that I know will be, much that I fear may chance."  
"Good morrow to you. Here the street is narrow:"  
"The throng that follows Caesar at the heels,"  
"Of senators, of praetors, common suitors,"  
"Will crowd a feeble man almost to death:"  
"I'll get me to a place more void, and there"  
"Speak to great Caesar as he comes along."  
Exit  
"I must go in. Ay me, how weak a thing"  
"The heart of woman is! O Brutus,"  
"The heavens speed thee in thine enterprise!"  
"Sure, the boy heard me: Brutus hath a suit"  
"That Caesar will not grant. O, I grow faint."  
"Run, Lucius, and commend me to my lord,"  
"Say I am merry: come to me again,"  
"And bring me word what he doth say to thee."  
"Exeunt severally"  
"ACT III"  
"SCENE I. Rome. Before the Capitol, the Senate sitting above."  
"A crowd of people, among them ARTEMIDORUS and the  Soothsayer. Flourish. Enter CAESAR, BRUTUS,  CASSIUS, CASCA, DECIUS BRUTUS, METELLUS CIMBER,  TREBONIUS, CINNA, ANTONY, LEPIDUS, POPILIUS, PUBLIUS, and others"  
"[To the Soothsayer]  The ides of March are come."  
"Ay, Caesar, but not gone."  
"Hail, Caesar! read this schedule."  
"Trebonius doth desire you to o'erread,"  
"At your best leisure, this his humble suit."  
"O Caesar, read mine first, for mine's a suit"  
"That touches Caesar nearer: read it, great Caesar."  
"What touches us ourself shall be last served."  
"Delay not, Caesar, read it instantly."  
"What, is the fellow mad?"  
"Sirrah, give place."  
"What, urge you your petitions in the street?"  
"Come to the Capitol."  
"CAESAR goes up to the Senate-House, the rest following"  
"I wish your enterprise to-day may thrive."  
"What enterprise, Popilius?"  
"Fare you well."  
"Advances to CAESAR"  
"What said Popilius Lena?"  
"He wish'd to-day our enterprise might thrive."  
"I fear our purpose is discovered."  
"Look, how he makes to Caesar, mark him."  
"Casca, be sudden, for we fear prevention."  
"Brutus, what shall be done? If this be known,"  
"Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back,"  
"For I will slay myself."  
"Cassius, be constant:"  
"Popilius Lena speaks not of our purposes,"  
"For, look, he smiles, and Caesar doth not change."  
"Trebonius knows his time, for, look you, Brutus."  
"He draws Mark Antony out of the way."  
"Exeunt ANTONY and TREBONIUS"  
"Where is Metellus Cimber? Let him go,"  
"And presently prefer his suit to Caesar."  
"He is address'd: press near and second him."  
"Casca, you are the first that rears your hand."  
"Are we all ready? What is now amiss"  
"That Caesar and his senate must redress?"  
"Most high, most mighty, and most puissant Caesar,"  
"Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat"  
"An humble heart,--"  
Kneeling  
"I must prevent thee, Cimber."  
"These couchings and these lowly courtesies"  
"Might fire the blood of ordinary men,"  
"And turn pre-ordinance and first decree"  
"Into the law of children. Be not fond,"  
"To think that Caesar bears such rebel blood"  
"That will be thaw'd from the true quality"  
"With that which melteth fools, I mean, sweet words,"  
"Low-crooked court'sies and base spaniel-fawning."  
"Thy brother by decree is banished:"  
"If thou dost bend and pray and fawn for him,"  
"I spurn thee like a cur out of my way."  
"Know, Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause"  
"Will he be satisfied."  
"Is there no voice more worthy than my own"  
"To sound more sweetly in great Caesar's ear"  
"For the repealing of my banish'd brother?"  
"I kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, Caesar,"  
"Desiring thee that Publius Cimber may"  
"Have an immediate freedom of repeal."  
"What, Brutus!"  
"Pardon, Caesar, Caesar, pardon:"  
"As low as to thy foot doth Cassius fall,"  
"To beg enfranchisement for Publius Cimber."  
"I could be well moved, if I were as you:"  
"If I could pray to move, prayers would move me:"  
"But I am constant as the northern star,"  
"Of whose true-fix'd and resting quality"  
"There is no fellow in the firmament."  
"The skies are painted with unnumber'd sparks,"  
"They are all fire and every one doth shine,"  
"But there's but one in all doth hold his place:"  
"So in the world, 'tis furnish'd well with men,"  
"And men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive,"  
"Yet in the number I do know but one"  
"That unassailable holds on his rank,"  
"Unshaked of motion: and that I am he,"  
"Let me a little show it, even in this,"  
"That I was constant Cimber should be banish'd,"  
"And constant do remain to keep him so."  
"O Caesar,--"  
"Hence! wilt thou lift up Olympus?"  
"Great Caesar,--"  
"Doth not Brutus bootless kneel?"  
"Speak, hands for me!"  
"CASCA first, then the other Conspirators and BRUTUS stab CAESAR"  
"Et tu, Brute! Then fall, Caesar."  
Dies  
"Liberty! Freedom! Tyranny is dead!"  
"Run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets."  
"Some to the common pulpits, and cry out"  
"'Liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!'"  
"People and senators, be not affrighted,"  
"Fly not, stand stiff: ambition's debt is paid."  
"Go to the pulpit, Brutus."  
"And Cassius too."  
"Where's Publius?"  
"Here, quite confounded with this mutiny."  
"Stand fast together, lest some friend of Caesar's"  
"Should chance--"  
"Talk not of standing. Publius, good cheer,"  
"There is no harm intended to your person,"  
"Nor to no Roman else: so tell them, Publius."  
"And leave us, Publius, lest that the people,"  
"Rushing on us, should do your age some mischief."  
"Do so: and let no man abide this deed,"  
"But we the doers."  
"Re-enter TREBONIUS"  
"Where is Antony?"  
"Fled to his house amazed:"  
"Men, wives and children stare, cry out and run"  
"As it were doomsday."  
"Fates, we will know your pleasures:"  
"That we shall die, we know, 'tis but the time"  
"And drawing days out, that men stand upon."  
"Why, he that cuts off twenty years of life"  
"Cuts off so many years of fearing death."  
"Grant that, and then is death a benefit:"  
"So are we Caesar's friends, that have abridged"  
"His time of fearing death. Stoop, Romans, stoop,"  
"And let us bathe our hands in Caesar's blood"  
"Up to the elbows, and besmear our swords:"  
"Then walk we forth, even to the market-place,"  
"And, waving our red weapons o'er our heads,"  
"Let's all cry 'Peace, freedom and liberty!'"  
"Stoop, then, and wash. How many ages hence"  
"Shall this our lofty scene be acted over"  
"In states unborn and accents yet unknown!"  
"How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,"  
"That now on Pompey's basis lies along"  
"No worthier than the dust!"  
"So oft as that shall be,"  
"So often shall the knot of us be call'd"  
"The men that gave their country liberty."  
"What, shall we forth?"  
"Ay, every man away:"  
"Brutus shall lead, and we will grace his heels"  
"With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome."  
"Enter a Servant"  
"Soft! who comes here? A friend of Antony's."  
"Thus, Brutus, did my master bid me kneel:"  
"Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall down,"  
"And, being prostrate, thus he bade me say:"  
"Brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest,"  
"Caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving:"  
"Say I love Brutus, and I honour him,"  
"Say I fear'd Caesar, honour'd him and loved him."  
"If Brutus will vouchsafe that Antony"  
"May safely come to him, and be resolved"  
"How Caesar hath deserved to lie in death,"  
"Mark Antony shall not love Caesar dead"  
"So well as Brutus living, but will follow"  
"The fortunes and affairs of noble Brutus"  
"Thorough the hazards of this untrod state"  
"With all true faith. So says my master Antony."  
"Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman,"  
"I never thought him worse."  
"Tell him, so please him come unto this place,"  
"He shall be satisfied, and, by my honour,"  
"Depart untouch'd."  
"I'll fetch him presently."  
Exit  
"I know that we shall have him well to friend."  
"I wish we may: but yet have I a mind"  
"That fears him much, and my misgiving still"  
"Falls shrewdly to the purpose."  
"But here comes Antony."  
"Re-enter ANTONY"  
"Welcome, Mark Antony."  
"O mighty Caesar! dost thou lie so low?"  
"Are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils,"  
"Shrunk to this little measure? Fare thee well."  
"I know not, gentlemen, what you intend,"  
"Who else must be let blood, who else is rank:"  
"If I myself, there is no hour so fit"  
"As Caesar's death hour, nor no instrument"  
"Of half that worth as those your swords, made rich"  
"With the most noble blood of all this world."  
"I do beseech ye, if you bear me hard,"  
"Now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke,"  
"Fulfil your pleasure. Live a thousand years,"  
"I shall not find myself so apt to die:"  
"No place will please me so, no mean of death,"  
"As here by Caesar, and by you cut off,"  
"The choice and master spirits of this age."  
"O Antony, beg not your death of us."  
"Though now we must appear bloody and cruel,"  
"As, by our hands and this our present act,"  
"You see we do, yet see you but our hands"  
"And this the bleeding business they have done:"  
"Our hearts you see not, they are pitiful,"  
"And pity to the general wrong of Rome--"  
"As fire drives out fire, so pity pity--"  
"Hath done this deed on Caesar. For your part,"  
"To you our swords have leaden points, Mark Antony:"  
"Our arms, in strength of malice, and our hearts"  
"Of brothers' temper, do receive you in"  
"With all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence."  
"Your voice shall be as strong as any man's"  
"In the disposing of new dignities."  
"Only be patient till we have appeased"  
"The multitude, beside themselves with fear,"  
"And then we will deliver you the cause,"  
"Why I, that did love Caesar when I struck him,"  
"Have thus proceeded."  
"I doubt not of your wisdom."  
"Let each man render me his bloody hand:"  
"First, Marcus Brutus, will I shake with you,"  
"Next, Caius Cassius, do I take your hand,"  
"Now, Decius Brutus, yours: now yours, Metellus,"  
"Yours, Cinna, and, my valiant Casca, yours,"  
"Though last, not last in love, yours, good Trebonius."  
"Gentlemen all,--alas, what shall I say?"  
"My credit now stands on such slippery ground,"  
"That one of two bad ways you must conceit me,"  
"Either a coward or a flatterer."  
"That I did love thee, Caesar, O, 'tis true:"  
"If then thy spirit look upon us now,"  
"Shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death,"  
"To see thy thy Anthony making his peace,"  
"Shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes,"  
"Most noble! in the presence of thy corse?"  
"Had I as many eyes as thou hast wounds,"  
"Weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood,"  
"It would become me better than to close"  
"In terms of friendship with thine enemies."  
"Pardon me, Julius! Here wast thou bay'd, brave hart,"  
"Here didst thou fall, and here thy hunters stand,"  
"Sign'd in thy spoil, and crimson'd in thy lethe."  
"O world, thou wast the forest to this hart,"  
"And this, indeed, O world, the heart of thee."  
"How like a deer, strucken by many princes,"  
"Dost thou here lie!"  
"Mark Antony,--"  
"Pardon me, Caius Cassius:"  
"The enemies of Caesar shall say this,"  
"Then, in a friend, it is cold modesty."  
"I blame you not for praising Caesar so,"  
"But what compact mean you to have with us?"  
"Will you be prick'd in number of our friends,"  
"Or shall we on, and not depend on you?"  
"Therefore I took your hands, but was, indeed,"  
"Sway'd from the point, by looking down on Caesar."  
"Friends am I with you all and love you all,"  
"Upon this hope, that you shall give me reasons"  
"Why and wherein Caesar was dangerous."  
"Or else were this a savage spectacle:"  
"Our reasons are so full of good regard"  
"That were you, Antony, the son of Caesar,"  
"You should be satisfied."  
"That's all I seek:"  
"And am moreover suitor that I may"  
"Produce his body to the market-place,"  
"And in the pulpit, as becomes a friend,"  
"Speak in the order of his funeral."  
"You shall, Mark Antony."  
"Brutus, a word with you."  
"Aside to BRUTUS"  
"You know not what you do: do not consent"  
"That Antony speak in his funeral:"  
"Know you how much the people may be moved"  
"By that which he will utter?"  
"By your pardon,"  
"I will myself into the pulpit first,"  
"And show the reason of our Caesar's death:"  
"What Antony shall speak, I will protest"  
"He speaks by leave and by permission,"  
"And that we are contented Caesar shall"  
"Have all true rites and lawful ceremonies."  
"It shall advantage more than do us wrong."  
"I know not what may fall, I like it not."  
"Mark Antony, here, take you Caesar's body."  
"You shall not in your funeral speech blame us,"  
"But speak all good you can devise of Caesar,"  
"And say you do't by our permission,"  
"Else shall you not have any hand at all"  
"About his funeral: and you shall speak"  
"In the same pulpit whereto I am going,"  
"After my speech is ended."  
"Be it so."  
"I do desire no more."  
"Prepare the body then, and follow us."  
"Exeunt all but ANTONY"  
"O, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth,"  
"That I am meek and gentle with these butchers!"  
"Thou art the ruins of the noblest man"  
"That ever lived in the tide of times."  
"Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood!"  
"Over thy wounds now do I prophesy,--"  
"Which, like dumb mouths, do ope their ruby lips,"  
"To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue--"  
"A curse shall light upon the limbs of men,"  
"Domestic fury and fierce civil strife"  
"Shall cumber all the parts of Italy,"  
"Blood and destruction shall be so in use"  
"And dreadful objects so familiar"  
"That mothers shall but smile when they behold"  
"Their infants quarter'd with the hands of war,"  
"All pity choked with custom of fell deeds:"  
"And Caesar's spirit, ranging for revenge,"  
"With Ate by his side come hot from hell,"  
"Shall in these confines with a monarch's voice"  
"Cry  'Havoc,' and let slip the dogs of war,"  
"That this foul deed shall smell above the earth"  
"With carrion men, groaning for burial."  
"Enter a Servant"  
"You serve Octavius Caesar, do you not?"  
"I do, Mark Antony."  
"Caesar did write for him to come to Rome."  
"He did receive his letters, and is coming,"  
"And bid me say to you by word of mouth--"  
"O Caesar!--"  
"Seeing the body"  
"Thy heart is big, get thee apart and weep."  
"Passion, I see, is catching, for mine eyes,"  
"Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,"  
"Began to water. Is thy master coming?"  
"He lies to-night within seven leagues of Rome."  
"Post back with speed, and tell him what hath chanced:"  
"Here is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,"  
"No Rome of safety for Octavius yet,"  
"Hie hence, and tell him so. Yet, stay awhile,"  
"Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corse"  
"Into the market-place: there shall I try"  
"In my oration, how the people take"  
"The cruel issue of these bloody men,"  
"According to the which, thou shalt discourse"  
"To young Octavius of the state of things."  
"Lend me your hand."  
"Exeunt with CAESAR's body"  
"SCENE II. The Forum."  
"Enter BRUTUS and CASSIUS, and a throng of Citizens"  
"We will be satisfied, let us be satisfied."  
"Then follow me, and give me audience, friends."  
"Cassius, go you into the other street,"  
"And part the numbers."  
"Those that will hear me speak, let 'em stay here,"  
"Those that will follow Cassius, go with him,"  
"And public reasons shall be rendered"  
"Of Caesar's death."  
"I will hear Brutus speak."  
"I will hear Cassius, and compare their reasons,"  
"When severally we hear them rendered."  
"Exit CASSIUS, with some of the Citizens. BRUTUS goes into the pulpit"  
"The noble Brutus is ascended: silence!"  
"Be patient till the last."  
"Romans, countrymen, and lovers! hear me for my"  
"cause, and be silent, that you may hear: believe me"  
"for mine honour, and have respect to mine honour, that"  
"you may believe: censure me in your wisdom, and"  
"awake your senses, that you may the better judge."  
"If there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of"  
"Caesar's, to him I say, that Brutus' love to Caesar"  
"was no less than his. If then that friend demand"  
"why Brutus rose against Caesar, this is my answer:"  
"--Not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved"  
"Rome more. Had you rather Caesar were living and"  
"die all slaves, than that Caesar were dead, to live"  
"all free men? As Caesar loved me, I weep for him,"  
"as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it, as he was"  
"valiant, I honour him: but, as he was ambitious, I"  
"slew him. There is tears for his love, joy for his"  
"fortune, honour for his valour, and death for his"  
"ambition. Who is here so base that would be a"  
"bondman? If any, speak, for him have I offended."  
"Who is here so rude that would not be a Roman? If"  
"any, speak, for him have I offended. Who is here so"  
"vile that will not love his country? If any, speak,"  
"for him have I offended. I pause for a reply."  
"None, Brutus, none."  
"Then none have I offended. I have done no more to"  
"Caesar than you shall do to Brutus. The question of"  
"his death is enrolled in the Capitol, his glory not"  
"extenuated, wherein he was worthy, nor his offences"  
"enforced, for which he suffered death."  
"Enter ANTONY and others, with CAESAR's body"  
"Here comes his body, mourned by Mark Antony: who,"  
"though he had no hand in his death, shall receive"  
"the benefit of his dying, a place in the"  
"commonwealth, as which of you shall not? With this"  
"I depart,--that, as I slew my best lover for the"  
"good of Rome, I have the same dagger for myself,"  
"when it shall please my country to need my death."  
"Live, Brutus! live, live!"  
"Bring him with triumph home unto his house."  
"Give him a statue with his ancestors."  
"Let him be Caesar."  
"Caesar's better parts"  
"Shall be crown'd in Brutus."  
"We'll bring him to his house"  
"With shouts and clamours."  
"My countrymen,--"  
"Peace, silence! Brutus speaks."  
"Peace, ho!"  
"Good countrymen, let me depart alone,"  
"And, for my sake, stay here with Antony:"  
"Do grace to Caesar's corpse, and grace his speech"  
"Tending to Caesar's glories, which Mark Antony,"  
"By our permission, is allow'd to make."  
"I do entreat you, not a man depart,"  
"Save I alone, till Antony have spoke."  
Exit  
"Stay, ho! and let us hear Mark Antony."  
"Let him go up into the public chair,"  
"We'll hear him. Noble Antony, go up."  
"For Brutus' sake, I am beholding to you."  
"Goes into the pulpit"  
"What does he say of Brutus?"  
"He says, for Brutus' sake,"  
"He finds himself beholding to us all."  
"'Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here."  
"This Caesar was a tyrant."  
"Nay, that's certain:"  
"We are blest that Rome is rid of him."  
"Peace! let us hear what Antony can say."  
"You gentle Romans,--"  
"Peace, ho! let us hear him."  
"Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears,"  
"I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him."  
"The evil that men do lives after them,"  
"The good is oft interred with their bones,"  
"So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus"  
"Hath told you Caesar was ambitious:"  
"If it were so, it was a grievous fault,"  
"And grievously hath Caesar answer'd it."  
"Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest--"  
"For Brutus is an honourable man,"  
"So are they all, all honourable men--"  
"Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral."  
"He was my friend, faithful and just to me:"  
"But Brutus says he was ambitious,"  
"And Brutus is an honourable man."  
"He hath brought many captives home to Rome"  
"Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill:"  
"Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?"  
"When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept:"  
"Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:"  
"Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,"  
"And Brutus is an honourable man."  
"You all did see that on the Lupercal"  
"I thrice presented him a kingly crown,"  
"Which he did thrice refuse: was this ambition?"  
"Yet Brutus says he was ambitious,"  
"And, sure, he is an honourable man."  
"I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,"  
"But here I am to speak what I do know."  
"You all did love him once, not without cause:"  
"What cause withholds you then, to mourn for him?"  
"O judgment! thou art fled to brutish beasts,"  
"And men have lost their reason. Bear with me,"  
"My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,"  
"And I must pause till it come back to me."  
"Methinks there is much reason in his sayings."  
"If thou consider rightly of the matter,"  
"Caesar has had great wrong."  
"Has he, masters?"  
"I fear there will a worse come in his place."  
"Mark'd ye his words? He would not take the crown,"  
"Therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious."  
"If it be found so, some will dear abide it."  
"Poor soul! his eyes are red as fire with weeping."  
"There's not a nobler man in Rome than Antony."  
"Now mark him, he begins again to speak."  
"But yesterday the word of Caesar might"  
"Have stood against the world, now lies he there."  
"And none so poor to do him reverence."  
"O masters, if I were disposed to stir"  
"Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,"  
"I should do Brutus wrong, and Cassius wrong,"  
"Who, you all know, are honourable men:"  
"I will not do them wrong, I rather choose"  
"To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,"  
"Than I will wrong such honourable men."  
"But here's a parchment with the seal of Caesar,"  
"I found it in his closet, 'tis his will:"  
"Let but the commons hear this testament--"  
"Which, pardon me, I do not mean to read--"  
"And they would go and kiss dead Caesar's wounds"  
"And dip their napkins in his sacred blood,"  
"Yea, beg a hair of him for memory,"  
"And, dying, mention it within their wills,"  
"Bequeathing it as a rich legacy"  
"Unto their issue."  
"We'll hear the will: read it, Mark Antony."  
"The will, the will! we will hear Caesar's will."  
"Have patience, gentle friends, I must not read it,"  
"It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you."  
"You are not wood, you are not stones, but men,"  
"And, being men, bearing the will of Caesar,"  
"It will inflame you, it will make you mad:"  
"'Tis good you know not that you are his heirs,"  
"For, if you should, O, what would come of it!"  
"Read the will, we'll hear it, Antony,"  
"You shall read us the will, Caesar's will."  
"Will you be patient? will you stay awhile?"  
"I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it:"  
"I fear I wrong the honourable men"  
"Whose daggers have stabb'd Caesar, I do fear it."  
"They were traitors: honourable men!"  
"The will! the testament!"  
"They were villains, murderers: the will! read the will."  
"You will compel me, then, to read the will?"  
"Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar,"  
"And let me show you him that made the will."  
"Shall I descend? and will you give me leave?"  
"Come down."  
Descend.  
"You shall have leave."  
"ANTONY comes down"  
"A ring, stand round."  
"Stand from the hearse, stand from the body."  
"Room for Antony, most noble Antony."  
"Nay, press not so upon me, stand far off."  
"Stand back, room, bear back."  
"If you have tears, prepare to shed them now."  
"You all do know this mantle: I remember"  
"The first time ever Caesar put it on,"  
"'Twas on a summer's evening, in his tent,"  
"That day he overcame the Nervii:"  
"Look, in this place ran Cassius' dagger through:"  
"See what a rent the envious Casca made:"  
"Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabb'd,"  
"And as he pluck'd his cursed steel away,"  
"Mark how the blood of Caesar follow'd it,"  
"As rushing out of doors, to be resolved"  
"If Brutus so unkindly knock'd, or no,"  
"For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar's angel:"  
"Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him!"  
"This was the most unkindest cut of all,"  
"For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,"  
"Ingratitude, more strong than traitors' arms,"  
"Quite vanquish'd him: then burst his mighty heart,"  
"And, in his mantle muffling up his face,"  
"Even at the base of Pompey's statua,"  
"Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell."  
"O, what a fall was there, my countrymen!"  
"Then I, and you, and all of us fell down,"  
"Whilst bloody treason flourish'd over us."  
"O, now you weep, and, I perceive, you feel"  
"The dint of pity: these are gracious drops."  
"Kind souls, what, weep you when you but behold"  
"Our Caesar's vesture wounded? Look you here,"  
"Here is himself, marr'd, as you see, with traitors."  
"O piteous spectacle!"  
"O noble Caesar!"  
"O woful day!"  
"O traitors, villains!"  
"O most bloody sight!"  
"We will be revenged."  
"Revenge! About! Seek! Burn! Fire! Kill! Slay!"  
"Let not a traitor live!"  
"Stay, countrymen."  
"Peace there! hear the noble Antony."  
"We'll hear him, we'll follow him, we'll die with him."  
"Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up"  
"To such a sudden flood of mutiny."  
"They that have done this deed are honourable:"  
"What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,"  
"That made them do it: they are wise and honourable,"  
"And will, no doubt, with reasons answer you."  
"I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts:"  
"I am no orator, as Brutus is,"  
"But, as you know me all, a plain blunt man,"  
"That love my friend, and that they know full well"  
"That gave me public leave to speak of him:"  
"For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,"  
"Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,"  
"To stir men's blood: I only speak right on,"  
"I tell you that which you yourselves do know,"  
"Show you sweet Caesar's wounds, poor poor dumb mouths,"  
"And bid them speak for me: but were I Brutus,"  
"And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony"  
"Would ruffle up your spirits and put a tongue"  
"In every wound of Caesar that should move"  
"The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny."  
"We'll mutiny."  
"We'll burn the house of Brutus."  
"Away, then! come, seek the conspirators."  
"Yet hear me, countrymen, yet hear me speak."  
"Peace, ho! Hear Antony. Most noble Antony!"  
"Why, friends, you go to do you know not what:"  
"Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves?"  
"Alas, you know not: I must tell you then:"  
"You have forgot the will I told you of."  
"Most true. The will! Let's stay and hear the will."  
"Here is the will, and under Caesar's seal."  
"To every Roman citizen he gives,"  
"To every several man, seventy-five drachmas."  
"Most noble Caesar! We'll revenge his death."  
"O royal Caesar!"  
"Hear me with patience."  
"Peace, ho!"  
"Moreover, he hath left you all his walks,"  
"His private arbours and new-planted orchards,"  
"On this side Tiber, he hath left them you,"  
"And to your heirs for ever, common pleasures,"  
"To walk abroad, and recreate yourselves."  
"Here was a Caesar! when comes such another?"  
"Never, never. Come, away, away!"  
"We'll burn his body in the holy place,"  
"And with the brands fire the traitors' houses."  
"Take up the body."  
"Go fetch fire."  
"Pluck down benches."  
"Pluck down forms, windows, any thing."  
"Exeunt Citizens with the body"  
"Now let it work. Mischief, thou art afoot,"  
"Take thou what course thou wilt!"  
"Enter a Servant"  
"How now, fellow!"  
"Sir, Octavius is already come to Rome."  
"Where is he?"  
"He and Lepidus are at Caesar's house."  
"And thither will I straight to visit him:"  
"He comes upon a wish. Fortune is merry,"  
"And in this mood will give us any thing."  
"I heard him say, Brutus and Cassius"  
"Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome."  
"Belike they had some notice of the people,"  
"How I had moved them. Bring me to Octavius."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE III. A street."  
"Enter CINNA the poet"  
"I dreamt to-night that I did feast with Caesar,"  
"And things unlucky charge my fantasy:"  
"I have no will to wander forth of doors,"  
"Yet something leads me forth."  
"Enter Citizens"  
"What is your name?"  
"Whither are you going?"  
"Where do you dwell?"  
"Are you a married man or a bachelor?"  
"Answer every man directly."  
"Ay, and briefly."  
"Ay, and wisely."  
"Ay, and truly, you were best."  
"What is my name? Whither am I going? Where do I"  
"dwell? Am I a married man or a bachelor? Then, to"  
"answer every man directly and briefly, wisely and"  
"truly: wisely I say, I am a bachelor."  
"That's as much as to say, they are fools that marry:"  
"you'll bear me a bang for that, I fear. Proceed, directly."  
"Directly, I am going to Caesar's funeral."  
"As a friend or an enemy?"  
"As a friend."  
"That matter is answered directly."  
"For your dwelling,--briefly."  
"Briefly, I dwell by the Capitol."  
"Your name, sir, truly."  
"Truly, my name is Cinna."  
"Tear him to pieces, he's a conspirator."  
"I am Cinna the poet, I am Cinna the poet."  
"Tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his bad verses."  
"I am not Cinna the conspirator."  
"It is no matter, his name's Cinna, pluck but his"  
"name out of his heart, and turn him going."  
"Tear him, tear him! Come, brands ho! fire-brands:"  
"to Brutus', to Cassius', burn all: some to Decius'"  
"house, and some to Casca's, some to Ligarius': away, go!"  
Exeunt  
"ACT IV"  
"SCENE I. A house in Rome."  
"ANTONY, OCTAVIUS, and LEPIDUS, seated at a table"  
"These many, then, shall die, their names are prick'd."  
"Your brother too must die, consent you, Lepidus?"  
"I do consent--"  
"Prick him down, Antony."  
"Upon condition Publius shall not live,"  
"Who is your sister's son, Mark Antony."  
"He shall not live, look, with a spot I damn him."  
"But, Lepidus, go you to Caesar's house,"  
"Fetch the will hither, and we shall determine"  
"How to cut off some charge in legacies."  
"What, shall I find you here?"  
"Or here, or at the Capitol."  
"Exit LEPIDUS"  
"This is a slight unmeritable man,"  
"Meet to be sent on errands: is it fit,"  
"The three-fold world divided, he should stand"  
"One of the three to share it?"  
"So you thought him,"  
"And took his voice who should be prick'd to die,"  
"In our black sentence and proscription."  
"Octavius, I have seen more days than you:"  
"And though we lay these honours on this man,"  
"To ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads,"  
"He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold,"  
"To groan and sweat under the business,"  
"Either led or driven, as we point the way,"  
"And having brought our treasure where we will,"  
"Then take we down his load, and turn him off,"  
"Like to the empty ass, to shake his ears,"  
"And graze in commons."  
"You may do your will,"  
"But he's a tried and valiant soldier."  
"So is my horse, Octavius, and for that"  
"I do appoint him store of provender:"  
"It is a creature that I teach to fight,"  
"To wind, to stop, to run directly on,"  
"His corporal motion govern'd by my spirit."  
"And, in some taste, is Lepidus but so,"  
"He must be taught and train'd and bid go forth,"  
"A barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds"  
"On abjects, orts and imitations,"  
"Which, out of use and staled by other men,"  
"Begin his fashion: do not talk of him,"  
"But as a property. And now, Octavius,"  
"Listen great things:--Brutus and Cassius"  
"Are levying powers: we must straight make head:"  
"Therefore let our alliance be combined,"  
"Our best friends made, our means stretch'd"  
"And let us presently go sit in council,"  
"How covert matters may be best disclosed,"  
"And open perils surest answered."  
"Let us do so: for we are at the stake,"  
"And bay'd about with many enemies,"  
"And some that smile have in their hearts, I fear,"  
"Millions of mischiefs."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. Camp near Sardis. Before BRUTUS's tent."  
"Drum. Enter BRUTUS, LUCILIUS, LUCIUS, and Soldiers, TITINIUS and PINDARUS meeting them"  
"Stand, ho!"  
"Give the word, ho! and stand."  
"What now, Lucilius! is Cassius near?"  
"He is at hand, and Pindarus is come"  
"To do you salutation from his master."  
"He greets me well. Your master, Pindarus,"  
"In his own change, or by ill officers,"  
"Hath given me some worthy cause to wish"  
"Things done, undone: but, if he be at hand,"  
"I shall be satisfied."  
"I do not doubt"  
"But that my noble master will appear"  
"Such as he is, full of regard and honour."  
"He is not doubted. A word, Lucilius,"  
"How he received you, let me be resolved."  
"With courtesy and with respect enough,"  
"But not with such familiar instances,"  
"Nor with such free and friendly conference,"  
"As he hath used of old."  
"Thou hast described"  
"A hot friend cooling: ever note, Lucilius,"  
"When love begins to sicken and decay,"  
"It useth an enforced ceremony."  
"There are no tricks in plain and simple faith,"  
"But hollow men, like horses hot at hand,"  
"Make gallant show and promise of their mettle,"  
"But when they should endure the bloody spur,"  
"They fall their crests, and, like deceitful jades,"  
"Sink in the trial. Comes his army on?"  
"They mean this night in Sardis to be quarter'd,"  
"The greater part, the horse in general,"  
"Are come with Cassius."  
"Hark! he is arrived."  
"Low march within"  
"March gently on to meet him."  
"Enter CASSIUS and his powers"  
"Stand, ho!"  
"Stand, ho! Speak the word along."  
Stand!  
Stand!  
Stand!  
"Most noble brother, you have done me wrong."  
"Judge me, you gods! wrong I mine enemies?"  
"And, if not so, how should I wrong a brother?"  
"Brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs,"  
"And when you do them--"  
"Cassius, be content."  
"Speak your griefs softly: I do know you well."  
"Before the eyes of both our armies here,"  
"Which should perceive nothing but love from us,"  
"Let us not wrangle: bid them move away,"  
"Then in my tent, Cassius, enlarge your griefs,"  
"And I will give you audience."  
Pindarus,  
"Bid our commanders lead their charges off"  
"A little from this ground."  
"Lucilius, do you the like, and let no man"  
"Come to our tent till we have done our conference."  
"Let Lucius and Titinius guard our door."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE III. Brutus's tent."  
"Enter BRUTUS and CASSIUS"  
"That you have wrong'd me doth appear in this:"  
"You have condemn'd and noted Lucius Pella"  
"For taking bribes here of the Sardians,"  
"Wherein my letters, praying on his side,"  
"Because I knew the man, were slighted off."  
"You wronged yourself to write in such a case."  
"In such a time as this it is not meet"  
"That every nice offence should bear his comment."  
"Let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself"  
"Are much condemn'd to have an itching palm,"  
"To sell and mart your offices for gold"  
"To undeservers."  
"I an itching palm!"  
"You know that you are Brutus that speak this,"  
"Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last."  
"The name of Cassius honours this corruption,"  
"And chastisement doth therefore hide his head."  
Chastisement!  
"Remember March, the ides of March remember:"  
"Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?"  
"What villain touch'd his body, that did stab,"  
"And not for justice? What, shall one of us"  
"That struck the foremost man of all this world"  
"But for supporting robbers, shall we now"  
"Contaminate our fingers with base bribes,"  
"And sell the mighty space of our large honours"  
"For so much trash as may be grasped thus?"  
"I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,"  
"Than such a Roman."  
"Brutus, bay not me,"  
"I'll not endure it: you forget yourself,"  
"To hedge me in, I am a soldier, I,"  
"Older in practise, abler than yourself"  
"To make conditions."  
"Go to, you are not, Cassius."  
"I am."  
"I say you are not."  
"Urge me no more, I shall forget myself,"  
"Have mind upon your health, tempt me no further."  
"Away, slight man!"  
"Is't possible?"  
"Hear me, for I will speak."  
"Must I give way and room to your rash choler?"  
"Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?"  
"O ye gods, ye gods! must I endure all this?"  
"All this! ay, more: fret till your proud heart break,"  
"Go show your slaves how choleric you are,"  
"And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge?"  
"Must I observe you? must I stand and crouch"  
"Under your testy humour? By the gods"  
"You shall digest the venom of your spleen,"  
"Though it do split you, for, from this day forth,"  
"I'll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter,"  
"When you are waspish."  
"Is it come to this?"  
"You say you are a better soldier:"  
"Let it appear so, make your vaunting true,"  
"And it shall please me well: for mine own part,"  
"I shall be glad to learn of noble men."  
"You wrong me every way, you wrong me, Brutus,"  
"I said, an elder soldier, not a better:"  
"Did I say 'better'?"  
"If you did, I care not."  
"When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me."  
"Peace, peace! you durst not so have tempted him."  
"I durst not!"  
No.  
"What, durst not tempt him!"  
"For your life you durst not!"  
"Do not presume too much upon my love,"  
"I may do that I shall be sorry for."  
"You have done that you should be sorry for."  
"There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats,"  
"For I am arm'd so strong in honesty"  
"That they pass by me as the idle wind,"  
"Which I respect not. I did send to you"  
"For certain sums of gold, which you denied me:"  
"For I can raise no money by vile means:"  
"By heaven, I had rather coin my heart,"  
"And drop my blood for drachmas, than to wring"  
"From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash"  
"By any indirection: I did send"  
"To you for gold to pay my legions,"  
"Which you denied me: was that done like Cassius?"  
"Should I have answer'd Caius Cassius so?"  
"When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous,"  
"To lock such rascal counters from his friends,"  
"Be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts,"  
"Dash him to pieces!"  
"I denied you not."  
"You did."  
"I did not: he was but a fool that brought"  
"My answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart:"  
"A friend should bear his friend's infirmities,"  
"But Brutus makes mine greater than they are."  
"I do not, till you practise them on me."  
"You love me not."  
"I do not like your faults."  
"A friendly eye could never see such faults."  
"A flatterer's would not, though they do appear"  
"As huge as high Olympus."  
"Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,"  
"Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,"  
"For Cassius is aweary of the world,"  
"Hated by one he loves, braved by his brother,"  
"Cheque'd like a bondman, all his faults observed,"  
"Set in a note-book, learn'd, and conn'd by rote,"  
"To cast into my teeth. O, I could weep"  
"My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,"  
"And here my naked breast, within, a heart"  
"Dearer than Plutus' mine, richer than gold:"  
"If that thou be'st a Roman, take it forth,"  
"I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart:"  
"Strike, as thou didst at Caesar, for, I know,"  
"When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him better"  
"Than ever thou lovedst Cassius."  
"Sheathe your dagger:"  
"Be angry when you will, it shall have scope,"  
"Do what you will, dishonour shall be humour."  
"O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb"  
"That carries anger as the flint bears fire,"  
"Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,"  
"And straight is cold again."  
"Hath Cassius lived"  
"To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,"  
"When grief, and blood ill-temper'd, vexeth him?"  
"When I spoke that, I was ill-temper'd too."  
"Do you confess so much? Give me your hand."  
"And my heart too."  
"O Brutus!"  
"What's the matter?"  
"Have not you love enough to bear with me,"  
"When that rash humour which my mother gave me"  
"Makes me forgetful?"  
"Yes, Cassius, and, from henceforth,"  
"When you are over-earnest with your Brutus,"  
"He'll think your mother chides, and leave you so."  
"[Within]  Let me go in to see the generals,"  
"There is some grudge between 'em, 'tis not meet"  
"They be alone."  
"[Within]  You shall not come to them."  
"[Within]  Nothing but death shall stay me."  
"Enter Poet, followed by LUCILIUS, TITINIUS, and LUCIUS"  
"How now! what's the matter?"  
"For shame, you generals! what do you mean?"  
"Love, and be friends, as two such men should be,"  
"For I have seen more years, I'm sure, than ye."  
"Ha, ha! how vilely doth this cynic rhyme!"  
"Get you hence, sirrah, saucy fellow, hence!"  
"Bear with him, Brutus, 'tis his fashion."  
"I'll know his humour, when he knows his time:"  
"What should the wars do with these jigging fools?"  
"Companion, hence!"  
"Away, away, be gone."  
"Exit Poet"  
"Lucilius and Titinius, bid the commanders"  
"Prepare to lodge their companies to-night."  
"And come yourselves, and bring Messala with you"  
"Immediately to us."  
"Exeunt LUCILIUS and TITINIUS"  
"Lucius, a bowl of wine!"  
"Exit LUCIUS"  
"I did not think you could have been so angry."  
"O Cassius, I am sick of many griefs."  
"Of your philosophy you make no use,"  
"If you give place to accidental evils."  
"No man bears sorrow better. Portia is dead."  
"Ha! Portia!"  
"She is dead."  
"How 'scaped I killing when I cross'd you so?"  
"O insupportable and touching loss!"  
"Upon what sickness?"  
"Impatient of my absence,"  
"And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony"  
"Have made themselves so strong:--for with her death"  
"That tidings came,--with this she fell distract,"  
"And, her attendants absent, swallow'd fire."  
"And died so?"  
"Even so."  
"O ye immortal gods!"  
"Re-enter LUCIUS, with wine and taper"  
"Speak no more of her. Give me a bowl of wine."  
"In this I bury all unkindness, Cassius."  
"My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge."  
"Fill, Lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup,"  
"I cannot drink too much of Brutus' love."  
"Come in, Titinius!"  
"Exit LUCIUS"  
"Re-enter TITINIUS, with MESSALA"  
"Welcome, good Messala."  
"Now sit we close about this taper here,"  
"And call in question our necessities."  
"Portia, art thou gone?"  
"No more, I pray you."  
"Messala, I have here received letters,"  
"That young Octavius and Mark Antony"  
"Come down upon us with a mighty power,"  
"Bending their expedition toward Philippi."  
"Myself have letters of the selfsame tenor."  
"With what addition?"  
"That by proscription and bills of outlawry,"  
"Octavius, Antony, and Lepidus,"  
"Have put to death an hundred senators."  
"Therein our letters do not well agree,"  
"Mine speak of seventy senators that died"  
"By their proscriptions, Cicero being one."  
"Cicero one!"  
"Cicero is dead,"  
"And by that order of proscription."  
"Had you your letters from your wife, my lord?"  
"No, Messala."  
"Nor nothing in your letters writ of her?"  
"Nothing, Messala."  
"That, methinks, is strange."  
"Why ask you? hear you aught of her in yours?"  
"No, my lord."  
"Now, as you are a Roman, tell me true."  
"Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell:"  
"For certain she is dead, and by strange manner."  
"Why, farewell, Portia. We must die, Messala:"  
"With meditating that she must die once,"  
"I have the patience to endure it now."  
"Even so great men great losses should endure."  
"I have as much of this in art as you,"  
"But yet my nature could not bear it so."  
"Well, to our work alive. What do you think"  
"Of marching to Philippi presently?"  
"I do not think it good."  
"Your reason?"  
"This it is:"  
"'Tis better that the enemy seek us:"  
"So shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers,"  
"Doing himself offence, whilst we, lying still,"  
"Are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness."  
"Good reasons must, of force, give place to better."  
"The people 'twixt Philippi and this ground"  
"Do stand but in a forced affection,"  
"For they have grudged us contribution:"  
"The enemy, marching along by them,"  
"By them shall make a fuller number up,"  
"Come on refresh'd, new-added, and encouraged,"  
"From which advantage shall we cut him off,"  
"If at Philippi we do face him there,"  
"These people at our back."  
"Hear me, good brother."  
"Under your pardon. You must note beside,"  
"That we have tried the utmost of our friends,"  
"Our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe:"  
"The enemy increaseth every day,"  
"We, at the height, are ready to decline."  
"There is a tide in the affairs of men,"  
"Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune,"  
"Omitted, all the voyage of their life"  
"Is bound in shallows and in miseries."  
"On such a full sea are we now afloat,"  
"And we must take the current when it serves,"  
"Or lose our ventures."  
"Then, with your will, go on,"  
"We'll along ourselves, and meet them at Philippi."  
"The deep of night is crept upon our talk,"  
"And nature must obey necessity,"  
"Which we will niggard with a little rest."  
"There is no more to say?"  
"No more. Good night:"  
"Early to-morrow will we rise, and hence."  
Lucius!  
"Enter LUCIUS"  
"My gown."  
"Exit LUCIUS"  
"Farewell, good Messala:"  
"Good night, Titinius. Noble, noble Cassius,"  
"Good night, and good repose."  
"O my dear brother!"  
"This was an ill beginning of the night:"  
"Never come such division 'tween our souls!"  
"Let it not, Brutus."  
"Every thing is well."  
"Good night, my lord."  
"Good night, good brother."  
"Good night, Lord Brutus."  
"Farewell, every one."  
"Exeunt all but BRUTUS"  
"Re-enter LUCIUS, with the gown"  
"Give me the gown. Where is thy instrument?"  
"Here in the tent."  
"What, thou speak'st drowsily?"  
"Poor knave, I blame thee not, thou art o'er-watch'd."  
"Call Claudius and some other of my men:"  
"I'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent."  
"Varro and Claudius!"  
"Enter VARRO and CLAUDIUS"  
"Calls my lord?"  
"I pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep,"  
"It may be I shall raise you by and by"  
"On business to my brother Cassius."  
"So please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure."  
"I will not have it so: lie down, good sirs,"  
"It may be I shall otherwise bethink me."  
"Look, Lucius, here's the book I sought for so,"  
"I put it in the pocket of my gown."  
"VARRO and CLAUDIUS lie down"  
"I was sure your lordship did not give it me."  
"Bear with me, good boy, I am much forgetful."  
"Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile,"  
"And touch thy instrument a strain or two?"  
"Ay, my lord, an't please you."  
"It does, my boy:"  
"I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing."  
"It is my duty, sir."  
"I should not urge thy duty past thy might,"  
"I know young bloods look for a time of rest."  
"I have slept, my lord, already."  
"It was well done, and thou shalt sleep again,"  
"I will not hold thee long: if I do live,"  
"I will be good to thee."  
"Music, and a song"  
"This is a sleepy tune. O murderous slumber,"  
"Lay'st thou thy leaden mace upon my boy,"  
"That plays thee music? Gentle knave, good night,"  
"I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee:"  
"If thou dost nod, thou break'st thy instrument,"  
"I'll take it from thee, and, good boy, good night."  
"Let me see, let me see, is not the leaf turn'd down"  
"Where I left reading? Here it is, I think."  
"Enter the Ghost of CAESAR"  
"How ill this taper burns! Ha! who comes here?"  
"I think it is the weakness of mine eyes"  
"That shapes this monstrous apparition."  
"It comes upon me. Art thou any thing?"  
"Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil,"  
"That makest my blood cold and my hair to stare?"  
"Speak to me what thou art."  
"Thy evil spirit, Brutus."  
"Why comest thou?"  
"To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi."  
"Well, then I shall see thee again?"  
"Ay, at Philippi."  
"Why, I will see thee at Philippi, then."  
"Exit Ghost"  
"Now I have taken heart thou vanishest:"  
"Ill spirit, I would hold more talk with thee."  
"Boy, Lucius! Varro! Claudius! Sirs, awake! Claudius!"  
"The strings, my lord, are false."  
"He thinks he still is at his instrument."  
"Lucius, awake!"  
"My lord?"  
"Didst thou dream, Lucius, that thou so criedst out?"  
"My lord, I do not know that I did cry."  
"Yes, that thou didst: didst thou see any thing?"  
"Nothing, my lord."  
"Sleep again, Lucius. Sirrah Claudius!"  
"To VARRO"  
"Fellow thou, awake!"  
"My lord?"  
"My lord?"  
"Why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?"  
"Did we, my lord?"  
"Ay: saw you any thing?"  
"No, my lord, I saw nothing."  
"Nor I, my lord."  
"Go and commend me to my brother Cassius,"  
"Bid him set on his powers betimes before,"  
"And we will follow."  
"It shall be done, my lord."  
Exeunt  
"ACT V"  
"SCENE I. The plains of Philippi."  
"Enter OCTAVIUS, ANTONY, and their army"  
"Now, Antony, our hopes are answered:"  
"You said the enemy would not come down,"  
"But keep the hills and upper regions,"  
"It proves not so: their battles are at hand,"  
"They mean to warn us at Philippi here,"  
"Answering before we do demand of them."  
"Tut, I am in their bosoms, and I know"  
"Wherefore they do it: they could be content"  
"To visit other places, and come down"  
"With fearful bravery, thinking by this face"  
"To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage,"  
"But 'tis not so."  
"Enter a Messenger"  
"Prepare you, generals:"  
"The enemy comes on in gallant show,"  
"Their bloody sign of battle is hung out,"  
"And something to be done immediately."  
"Octavius, lead your battle softly on,"  
"Upon the left hand of the even field."  
"Upon the right hand I, keep thou the left."  
"Why do you cross me in this exigent?"  
"I do not cross you, but I will do so."  
March  
"Drum. Enter BRUTUS, CASSIUS, and their Army, LUCILIUS, TITINIUS, MESSALA, and others"  
"They stand, and would have parley."  
"Stand fast, Titinius: we must out and talk."  
"Mark Antony, shall we give sign of battle?"  
"No, Caesar, we will answer on their charge."  
"Make forth, the generals would have some words."  
"Stir not until the signal."  
"Words before blows: is it so, countrymen?"  
"Not that we love words better, as you do."  
"Good words are better than bad strokes, Octavius."  
"In your bad strokes, Brutus, you give good words:"  
"Witness the hole you made in Caesar's heart,"  
"Crying 'Long live! hail, Caesar!'"  
Antony,  
"The posture of your blows are yet unknown,"  
"But for your words, they rob the Hybla bees,"  
"And leave them honeyless."  
"Not stingless too."  
"O, yes, and soundless too,"  
"For you have stol'n their buzzing, Antony,"  
"And very wisely threat before you sting."  
"Villains, you did not so, when your vile daggers"  
"Hack'd one another in the sides of Caesar:"  
"You show'd your teeth like apes, and fawn'd like hounds,"  
"And bow'd like bondmen, kissing Caesar's feet,"  
"Whilst damned Casca, like a cur, behind"  
"Struck Caesar on the neck. O you flatterers!"  
"Flatterers! Now, Brutus, thank yourself:"  
"This tongue had not offended so to-day,"  
"If Cassius might have ruled."  
"Come, come, the cause: if arguing make us sweat,"  
"The proof of it will turn to redder drops. Look,"  
"I draw a sword against conspirators,"  
"When think you that the sword goes up again?"  
"Never, till Caesar's three and thirty wounds"  
"Be well avenged, or till another Caesar"  
"Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors."  
"Caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands,"  
"Unless thou bring'st them with thee."  
"So I hope,"  
"I was not born to die on Brutus' sword."  
"O, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,"  
"Young man, thou couldst not die more honourable."  
"A peevish schoolboy, worthless of such honour,"  
"Join'd with a masker and a reveller!"  
"Old Cassius still!"  
"Come, Antony, away!"  
"Defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth:"  
"If you dare fight to-day, come to the field,"  
"If not, when you have stomachs."  
"Exeunt OCTAVIUS, ANTONY, and their army"  
"Why, now, blow wind, swell billow and swim bark!"  
"The storm is up, and all is on the hazard."  
"Ho, Lucilius! hark, a word with you."  
"[Standing forth]	My lord?"  
"BRUTUS and LUCILIUS converse apart"  
Messala!  
"[Standing forth]  What says my general?"  
Messala,  
"This is my birth-day, as this very day"  
"Was Cassius born. Give me thy hand, Messala:"  
"Be thou my witness that against my will,"  
"As Pompey was, am I compell'd to set"  
"Upon one battle all our liberties."  
"You know that I held Epicurus strong"  
"And his opinion: now I change my mind,"  
"And partly credit things that do presage."  
"Coming from Sardis, on our former ensign"  
"Two mighty eagles fell, and there they perch'd,"  
"Gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands,"  
"Who to Philippi here consorted us:"  
"This morning are they fled away and gone,"  
"And in their steads do ravens, crows and kites,"  
"Fly o'er our heads and downward look on us,"  
"As we were sickly prey: their shadows seem"  
"A canopy most fatal, under which"  
"Our army lies, ready to give up the ghost."  
"Believe not so."  
"I but believe it partly,"  
"For I am fresh of spirit and resolved"  
"To meet all perils very constantly."  
"Even so, Lucilius."  
"Now, most noble Brutus,"  
"The gods to-day stand friendly, that we may,"  
"Lovers in peace, lead on our days to age!"  
"But since the affairs of men rest still incertain,"  
"Let's reason with the worst that may befall."  
"If we do lose this battle, then is this"  
"The very last time we shall speak together:"  
"What are you then determined to do?"  
"Even by the rule of that philosophy"  
"By which I did blame Cato for the death"  
"Which he did give himself, I know not how,"  
"But I do find it cowardly and vile,"  
"For fear of what might fall, so to prevent"  
"The time of life: arming myself with patience"  
"To stay the providence of some high powers"  
"That govern us below."  
"Then, if we lose this battle,"  
"You are contented to be led in triumph"  
"Thorough the streets of Rome?"  
"No, Cassius, no: think not, thou noble Roman,"  
"That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome,"  
"He bears too great a mind. But this same day"  
"Must end that work the ides of March begun,"  
"And whether we shall meet again I know not."  
"Therefore our everlasting farewell take:"  
"For ever, and for ever, farewell, Cassius!"  
"If we do meet again, why, we shall smile,"  
"If not, why then, this parting was well made."  
"For ever, and for ever, farewell, Brutus!"  
"If we do meet again, we'll smile indeed,"  
"If not, 'tis true this parting was well made."  
"Why, then, lead on. O, that a man might know"  
"The end of this day's business ere it come!"  
"But it sufficeth that the day will end,"  
"And then the end is known. Come, ho! away!"  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. The same. The field of battle."  
"Alarum. Enter BRUTUS and MESSALA"  
"Ride, ride, Messala, ride, and give these bills"  
"Unto the legions on the other side."  
"Loud alarum"  
"Let them set on at once, for I perceive"  
"But cold demeanor in Octavius' wing,"  
"And sudden push gives them the overthrow."  
"Ride, ride, Messala: let them all come down."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE III. Another part of the field."  
"Alarums. Enter CASSIUS and TITINIUS"  
"O, look, Titinius, look, the villains fly!"  
"Myself have to mine own turn'd enemy:"  
"This ensign here of mine was turning back,"  
"I slew the coward, and did take it from him."  
"O Cassius, Brutus gave the word too early,"  
"Who, having some advantage on Octavius,"  
"Took it too eagerly: his soldiers fell to spoil,"  
"Whilst we by Antony are all enclosed."  
"Enter PINDARUS"  
"Fly further off, my lord, fly further off,"  
"Mark Antony is in your tents, my lord"  
"Fly, therefore, noble Cassius, fly far off."  
"This hill is far enough. Look, look, Titinius,"  
"Are those my tents where I perceive the fire?"  
"They are, my lord."  
"Titinius, if thou lovest me,"  
"Mount thou my horse, and hide thy spurs in him,"  
"Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops,"  
"And here again, that I may rest assured"  
"Whether yond troops are friend or enemy."  
"I will be here again, even with a thought."  
Exit  
"Go, Pindarus, get higher on that hill,"  
"My sight was ever thick, regard Titinius,"  
"And tell me what thou notest about the field."  
"PINDARUS ascends the hill"  
"This day I breathed first: time is come round,"  
"And where I did begin, there shall I end,"  
"My life is run his compass. Sirrah, what news?"  
"[Above]  O my lord!"  
"What news?"  
"[Above]  Titinius is enclosed round about"  
"With horsemen, that make to him on the spur,"  
"Yet he spurs on. Now they are almost on him."  
"Now, Titinius! Now some light. O, he lights too."  
"He's ta'en."  
Shout  
"And, hark! they shout for joy."  
"Come down, behold no more."  
"O, coward that I am, to live so long,"  
"To see my best friend ta'en before my face!"  
"PINDARUS descends"  
"Come hither, sirrah:"  
"In Parthia did I take thee prisoner,"  
"And then I swore thee, saving of thy life,"  
"That whatsoever I did bid thee do,"  
"Thou shouldst attempt it. Come now, keep thine oath,"  
"Now be a freeman: and with this good sword,"  
"That ran through Caesar's bowels, search this bosom."  
"Stand not to answer: here, take thou the hilts,"  
"And, when my face is cover'd, as 'tis now,"  
"Guide thou the sword."  
"PINDARUS stabs him"  
"Caesar, thou art revenged,"  
"Even with the sword that kill'd thee."  
Dies  
"So, I am free, yet would not so have been,"  
"Durst I have done my will. O Cassius,"  
"Far from this country Pindarus shall run,"  
"Where never Roman shall take note of him."  
Exit  
"Re-enter TITINIUS with MESSALA"  
"It is but change, Titinius, for Octavius"  
"Is overthrown by noble Brutus' power,"  
"As Cassius' legions are by Antony."  
"These tidings will well comfort Cassius."  
"Where did you leave him?"  
"All disconsolate,"  
"With Pindarus his bondman, on this hill."  
"Is not that he t hat lies upon the ground?"  
"He lies not like the living. O my heart!"  
"Is not that he?"  
"No, this was he, Messala,"  
"But Cassius is no more. O setting sun,"  
"As in thy red rays thou dost sink to-night,"  
"So in his red blood Cassius' day is set,"  
"The sun of Rome is set! Our day is gone,"  
"Clouds, dews, and dangers come, our deeds are done!"  
"Mistrust of my success hath done this deed."  
"Mistrust of good success hath done this deed."  
"O hateful error, melancholy's child,"  
"Why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men"  
"The things that are not? O error, soon conceived,"  
"Thou never comest unto a happy birth,"  
"But kill'st the mother that engender'd thee!"  
"What, Pindarus! where art thou, Pindarus?"  
"Seek him, Titinius, whilst I go to meet"  
"The noble Brutus, thrusting this report"  
"Into his ears, I may say, thrusting it,"  
"For piercing steel and darts envenomed"  
"Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus"  
"As tidings of this sight."  
"Hie you, Messala,"  
"And I will seek for Pindarus the while."  
"Exit MESSALA"  
"Why didst thou send me forth, brave Cassius?"  
"Did I not meet thy friends? and did not they"  
"Put on my brows this wreath of victory,"  
"And bid me give it thee? Didst thou not hear their shouts?"  
"Alas, thou hast misconstrued every thing!"  
"But, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow,"  
"Thy Brutus bid me give it thee, and I"  
"Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace,"  
"And see how I regarded Caius Cassius."  
"By your leave, gods:--this is a Roman's part"  
"Come, Cassius' sword, and find Titinius' heart."  
"Kills himself"  
"Alarum. Re-enter MESSALA, with BRUTUS, CATO, STRATO, VOLUMNIUS, and LUCILIUS"  
"Where, where, Messala, doth his body lie?"  
"Lo, yonder, and Titinius mourning it."  
"Titinius' face is upward."  
"He is slain."  
"O Julius Caesar, thou art mighty yet!"  
"Thy spirit walks abroad and turns our swords"  
"In our own proper entrails."  
"Low alarums"  
"Brave Titinius!"  
"Look, whether he have not crown'd dead Cassius!"  
"Are yet two Romans living such as these?"  
"The last of all the Romans, fare thee well!"  
"It is impossible that ever Rome"  
"Should breed thy fellow. Friends, I owe more tears"  
"To this dead man than you shall see me pay."  
"I shall find time, Cassius, I shall find time."  
"Come, therefore, and to Thasos send his body:"  
"His funerals shall not be in our camp,"  
"Lest it discomfort us. Lucilius, come,"  
"And come, young Cato, let us to the field."  
"Labeo and Flavius, set our battles on:"  
"'Tis three o'clock, and, Romans, yet ere night"  
"We shall try fortune in a second fight."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE IV. Another part of the field."  
"Alarum. Enter fighting, Soldiers of both armies, then BRUTUS, CATO, LUCILIUS, and others"  
"Yet, countrymen, O, yet hold up your heads!"  
"What bastard doth not? Who will go with me?"  
"I will proclaim my name about the field:"  
"I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!"  
"A foe to tyrants, and my country's friend,"  
"I am the son of Marcus Cato, ho!"  
"And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I,"  
"Brutus, my country's friend, know me for Brutus!"  
Exit  
"O young and noble Cato, art thou down?"  
"Why, now thou diest as bravely as Titinius,"  
"And mayst be honour'd, being Cato's son."  
"Yield, or thou diest."  
"Only I yield to die:"  
"There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight,"  
"Offering money"  
"Kill Brutus, and be honour'd in his death."  
"We must not. A noble prisoner!"  
"Room, ho! Tell Antony, Brutus is ta'en."  
"I'll tell the news. Here comes the general."  
"Enter ANTONY"  
"Brutus is ta'en, Brutus is ta'en, my lord."  
"Where is he?"  
"Safe, Antony, Brutus is safe enough:"  
"I dare assure thee that no enemy"  
"Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus:"  
"The gods defend him from so great a shame!"  
"When you do find him, or alive or dead,"  
"He will be found like Brutus, like himself."  
"This is not Brutus, friend, but, I assure you,"  
"A prize no less in worth: keep this man safe,"  
"Give him all kindness: I had rather have"  
"Such men my friends than enemies. Go on,"  
"And see whether Brutus be alive or dead,"  
"And bring us word unto Octavius' tent"  
"How every thing is chanced."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE V. Another part of the field."  
"Enter BRUTUS, DARDANIUS, CLITUS, STRATO, and VOLUMNIUS"  
"Come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock."  
"Statilius show'd the torch-light, but, my lord,"  
"He came not back: he is or ta'en or slain."  
"Sit thee down, Clitus: slaying is the word,"  
"It is a deed in fashion. Hark thee, Clitus."  
Whispers  
"What, I, my lord? No, not for all the world."  
"Peace then! no words."  
"I'll rather kill myself."  
"Hark thee, Dardanius."  
Whispers  
"Shall I do such a deed?"  
"O Dardanius!"  
"O Clitus!"  
"What ill request did Brutus make to thee?"  
"To kill him, Clitus. Look, he meditates."  
"Now is that noble vessel full of grief,"  
"That it runs over even at his eyes."  
"Come hither, good Volumnius, list a word."  
"What says my lord?"  
"Why, this, Volumnius:"  
"The ghost of Caesar hath appear'd to me"  
"Two several times by night, at Sardis once,"  
"And, this last night, here in Philippi fields:"  
"I know my hour is come."  
"Not so, my lord."  
"Nay, I am sure it is, Volumnius."  
"Thou seest the world, Volumnius, how it goes,"  
"Our enemies have beat us to the pit:"  
"Low alarums"  
"It is more worthy to leap in ourselves,"  
"Than tarry till they push us. Good Volumnius,"  
"Thou know'st that we two went to school together:"  
"Even for that our love of old, I prithee,"  
"Hold thou my sword-hilts, whilst I run on it."  
"That's not an office for a friend, my lord."  
"Alarum still"  
"Fly, fly, my lord, there is no tarrying here."  
"Farewell to you, and you, and you, Volumnius."  
"Strato, thou hast been all this while asleep,"  
"Farewell to thee too, Strato. Countrymen,"  
"My heart doth joy that yet in all my life"  
"I found no man but he was true to me."  
"I shall have glory by this losing day"  
"More than Octavius and Mark Antony"  
"By this vile conquest shall attain unto."  
"So fare you well at once, for Brutus' tongue"  
"Hath almost ended his life's history:"  
"Night hangs upon mine eyes, my bones would rest,"  
"That have but labour'd to attain this hour."  
"Alarum. Cry within, 'Fly, fly, fly!'"  
"Fly, my lord, fly."  
"Hence! I will follow."  
"Exeunt CLITUS, DARDANIUS, and VOLUMNIUS"  
"I prithee, Strato, stay thou by thy lord:"  
"Thou art a fellow of a good respect,"  
"Thy life hath had some smatch of honour in it:"  
"Hold then my sword, and turn away thy face,"  
"While I do run upon it. Wilt thou, Strato?"  
"Give me your hand first. Fare you well, my lord."  
"Farewell, good Strato."  
"Runs on his sword"  
"Caesar, now be still:"  
"I kill'd not thee with half so good a will."  
Dies  
"Alarum. Retreat. Enter OCTAVIUS, ANTONY, MESSALA, LUCILIUS, and the army"  
"What man is that?"  
"My master's man. Strato, where is thy master?"  
"Free from the bondage you are in, Messala:"  
"The conquerors can but make a fire of him,"  
"For Brutus only overcame himself,"  
"And no man else hath honour by his death."  
"So Brutus should be found. I thank thee, Brutus,"  
"That thou hast proved Lucilius' saying true."  
"All that served Brutus, I will entertain them."  
"Fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?"  
"Ay, if Messala will prefer me to you."  
"Do so, good Messala."  
"How died my master, Strato?"  
"I held the sword, and he did run on it."  
"Octavius, then take him to follow thee,"  
"That did the latest service to my master."  
"This was the noblest Roman of them all:"  
"All the conspirators save only he"  
"Did that they did in envy of great Caesar,"  
"He only, in a general honest thought"  
"And common good to all, made one of them."  
"His life was gentle, and the elements"  
"So mix'd in him that Nature might stand up"  
"And say to all the world 'This was a man!'"  
"According to his virtue let us use him,"  
"With all respect and rites of burial."  
"Within my tent his bones to-night shall lie,"  
"Most like a soldier, order'd honourably."  
"So call the field to rest, and let's away,"  
"To part the glories of this happy day."  
 } 
 
Hamlet 
 
 "ACT I"  
"SCENE I. Elsinore. A platform before the castle."  
"FRANCISCO at his post. Enter to him BERNARDO"  
"Who's there?"  
"Nay, answer me: stand, and unfold yourself."  
"Long live the king!"  
Bernardo?  
He.  
"You come most carefully upon your hour."  
"'Tis now struck twelve, get thee to bed, Francisco."  
"For this relief much thanks: 'tis bitter cold,"  
"And I am sick at heart."  
"Have you had quiet guard?"  
"Not a mouse stirring."  
"Well, good night."  
"If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus,"  
"The rivals of my watch, bid them make haste."  
"I think I hear them. Stand, ho! Who's there?"  
"Enter HORATIO and MARCELLUS"  
"Friends to this ground."  
"And liegemen to the Dane."  
"Give you good night."  
"O, farewell, honest soldier:"  
"Who hath relieved you?"  
"Bernardo has my place."  
"Give you good night."  
Exit  
"Holla! Bernardo!"  
Say,  
"What, is Horatio there?"  
"A piece of him."  
"Welcome, Horatio: welcome, good Marcellus."  
"What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?"  
"I have seen nothing."  
"Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy,"  
"And will not let belief take hold of him"  
"Touching this dreaded sight, twice seen of us:"  
"Therefore I have entreated him along"  
"With us to watch the minutes of this night,"  
"That if again this apparition come,"  
"He may approve our eyes and speak to it."  
"Tush, tush, 'twill not appear."  
"Sit down awhile,"  
"And let us once again assail your ears,"  
"That are so fortified against our story"  
"What we have two nights seen."  
"Well, sit we down,"  
"And let us hear Bernardo speak of this."  
"Last night of all,"  
"When yond same star that's westward from the pole"  
"Had made his course to illume that part of heaven"  
"Where now it burns, Marcellus and myself,"  
"The bell then beating one,--"  
"Enter Ghost"  
"Peace, break thee off, look, where it comes again!"  
"In the same figure, like the king that's dead."  
"Thou art a scholar, speak to it, Horatio."  
"Looks it not like the king?  mark it, Horatio."  
"Most like: it harrows me with fear and wonder."  
"It would be spoke to."  
"Question it, Horatio."  
"What art thou that usurp'st this time of night,"  
"Together with that fair and warlike form"  
"In which the majesty of buried Denmark"  
"Did sometimes march? by heaven I charge thee, speak!"  
"It is offended."  
"See, it stalks away!"  
"Stay! speak, speak! I charge thee, speak!"  
"Exit Ghost"  
"'Tis gone, and will not answer."  
"How now, Horatio! you tremble and look pale:"  
"Is not this something more than fantasy?"  
"What think you on't?"  
"Before my God, I might not this believe"  
"Without the sensible and true avouch"  
"Of mine own eyes."  
"Is it not like the king?"  
"As thou art to thyself:"  
"Such was the very armour he had on"  
"When he the ambitious Norway combated,"  
"So frown'd he once, when, in an angry parle,"  
"He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice."  
"'Tis strange."  
"Thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,"  
"With martial stalk hath he gone by our watch."  
"In what particular thought to work I know not,"  
"But in the gross and scope of my opinion,"  
"This bodes some strange eruption to our state."  
"Good now, sit down, and tell me, he that knows,"  
"Why this same strict and most observant watch"  
"So nightly toils the subject of the land,"  
"And why such daily cast of brazen cannon,"  
"And foreign mart for implements of war,"  
"Why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task"  
"Does not divide the Sunday from the week,"  
"What might be toward, that this sweaty haste"  
"Doth make the night joint-labourer with the day:"  
"Who is't that can inform me?"  
"That can I,"  
"At least, the whisper goes so. Our last king,"  
"Whose image even but now appear'd to us,"  
"Was, as you know, by Fortinbras of Norway,"  
"Thereto prick'd on by a most emulate pride,"  
"Dared to the combat, in which our valiant Hamlet--"  
"For so this side of our known world esteem'd him--"  
"Did slay this Fortinbras, who by a seal'd compact,"  
"Well ratified by law and heraldry,"  
"Did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands"  
"Which he stood seized of, to the conqueror:"  
"Against the which, a moiety competent"  
"Was gaged by our king, which had return'd"  
"To the inheritance of Fortinbras,"  
"Had he been vanquisher, as, by the same covenant,"  
"And carriage of the article design'd,"  
"His fell to Hamlet. Now, sir, young Fortinbras,"  
"Of unimproved mettle hot and full,"  
"Hath in the skirts of Norway here and there"  
"Shark'd up a list of lawless resolutes,"  
"For food and diet, to some enterprise"  
"That hath a stomach in't, which is no other--"  
"As it doth well appear unto our state--"  
"But to recover of us, by strong hand"  
"And terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands"  
"So by his father lost: and this, I take it,"  
"Is the main motive of our preparations,"  
"The source of this our watch and the chief head"  
"Of this post-haste and romage in the land."  
"I think it be no other but e'en so:"  
"Well may it sort that this portentous figure"  
"Comes armed through our watch, so like the king"  
"That was and is the question of these wars."  
"A mote it is to trouble the mind's eye."  
"In the most high and palmy state of Rome,"  
"A little ere the mightiest Julius fell,"  
"The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead"  
"Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets:"  
"As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood,"  
"Disasters in the sun, and the moist star"  
"Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands"  
"Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse:"  
"And even the like precurse of fierce events,"  
"As harbingers preceding still the fates"  
"And prologue to the omen coming on,"  
"Have heaven and earth together demonstrated"  
"Unto our climatures and countrymen.--"  
"But soft, behold! lo, where it comes again!"  
"Re-enter Ghost"  
"I'll cross it, though it blast me. Stay, illusion!"  
"If thou hast any sound, or use of voice,"  
"Speak to me:"  
"If there be any good thing to be done,"  
"That may to thee do ease and grace to me,"  
"Speak to me:"  
"Cock crows"  
"If thou art privy to thy country's fate,"  
"Which, happily, foreknowing may avoid, O, speak!"  
"Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life"  
"Extorted treasure in the womb of earth,"  
"For which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death,"  
"Speak of it: stay, and speak! Stop it, Marcellus."  
"Shall I strike at it with my partisan?"  
"Do, if it will not stand."  
"'Tis here!"  
"'Tis here!"  
"'Tis gone!"  
"Exit Ghost"  
"We do it wrong, being so majestical,"  
"To offer it the show of violence,"  
"For it is, as the air, invulnerable,"  
"And our vain blows malicious mockery."  
"It was about to speak, when the cock crew."  
"And then it started like a guilty thing"  
"Upon a fearful summons. I have heard,"  
"The cock, that is the trumpet to the morn,"  
"Doth with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat"  
"Awake the god of day, and, at his warning,"  
"Whether in sea or fire, in earth or air,"  
"The extravagant and erring spirit hies"  
"To his confine: and of the truth herein"  
"This present object made probation."  
"It faded on the crowing of the cock."  
"Some say that ever 'gainst that season comes"  
"Wherein our Saviour's birth is celebrated,"  
"The bird of dawning singeth all night long:"  
"And then, they say, no spirit dares stir abroad,"  
"The nights are wholesome, then no planets strike,"  
"No fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm,"  
"So hallow'd and so gracious is the time."  
"So have I heard and do in part believe it."  
"But, look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,"  
"Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill:"  
"Break we our watch up, and by my advice,"  
"Let us impart what we have seen to-night"  
"Unto young Hamlet, for, upon my life,"  
"This spirit, dumb to us, will speak to him."  
"Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it,"  
"As needful in our loves, fitting our duty?"  
"Let's do't, I pray, and I this morning know"  
"Where we shall find him most conveniently."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. A room of state in the castle."  
"Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, HAMLET,  POLONIUS, LAERTES, VOLTIMAND, CORNELIUS, Lords, and Attendants"  
"Though yet of Hamlet our dear brother's death"  
"The memory be green, and that it us befitted"  
"To bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom"  
"To be contracted in one brow of woe,"  
"Yet so far hath discretion fought with nature"  
"That we with wisest sorrow think on him,"  
"Together with remembrance of ourselves."  
"Therefore our sometime sister, now our queen,"  
"The imperial jointress to this warlike state,"  
"Have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy,--"  
"With an auspicious and a dropping eye,"  
"With mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage,"  
"In equal scale weighing delight and dole,--"  
"Taken to wife: nor have we herein barr'd"  
"Your better wisdoms, which have freely gone"  
"With this affair along. For all, our thanks."  
"Now follows, that you know, young Fortinbras,"  
"Holding a weak supposal of our worth,"  
"Or thinking by our late dear brother's death"  
"Our state to be disjoint and out of frame,"  
"Colleagued with the dream of his advantage,"  
"He hath not fail'd to pester us with message,"  
"Importing the surrender of those lands"  
"Lost by his father, with all bonds of law,"  
"To our most valiant brother. So much for him."  
"Now for ourself and for this time of meeting:"  
"Thus much the business is: we have here writ"  
"To Norway, uncle of young Fortinbras,--"  
"Who, impotent and bed-rid, scarcely hears"  
"Of this his nephew's purpose,--to suppress"  
"His further gait herein, in that the levies,"  
"The lists and full proportions, are all made"  
"Out of his subject: and we here dispatch"  
"You, good Cornelius, and you, Voltimand,"  
"For bearers of this greeting to old Norway,"  
"Giving to you no further personal power"  
"To business with the king, more than the scope"  
"Of these delated articles allow."  
"Farewell, and let your haste commend your duty."  
"In that and all things will we show our duty."  
"We doubt it nothing: heartily farewell."  
"Exeunt VOLTIMAND and CORNELIUS"  
"And now, Laertes, what's the news with you?"  
"You told us of some suit, what is't, Laertes?"  
"You cannot speak of reason to the Dane,"  
"And loose your voice: what wouldst thou beg, Laertes,"  
"That shall not be my offer, not thy asking?"  
"The head is not more native to the heart,"  
"The hand more instrumental to the mouth,"  
"Than is the throne of Denmark to thy father."  
"What wouldst thou have, Laertes?"  
"My dread lord,"  
"Your leave and favour to return to France,"  
"From whence though willingly I came to Denmark,"  
"To show my duty in your coronation,"  
"Yet now, I must confess, that duty done,"  
"My thoughts and wishes bend again toward France"  
"And bow them to your gracious leave and pardon."  
"Have you your father's leave? What says Polonius?"  
"He hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave"  
"By laboursome petition, and at last"  
"Upon his will I seal'd my hard consent:"  
"I do beseech you, give him leave to go."  
"Take thy fair hour, Laertes, time be thine,"  
"And thy best graces spend it at thy will!"  
"But now, my cousin Hamlet, and my son,--"  
"[Aside]  A little more than kin, and less than kind."  
"How is it that the clouds still hang on you?"  
"Not so, my lord, I am too much i' the sun."  
"Good Hamlet, cast thy nighted colour off,"  
"And let thine eye look like a friend on Denmark."  
"Do not for ever with thy vailed lids"  
"Seek for thy noble father in the dust:"  
"Thou know'st 'tis common, all that lives must die,"  
"Passing through nature to eternity."  
"Ay, madam, it is common."  
"If it be,"  
"Why seems it so particular with thee?"  
"Seems, madam! nay it is, I know not 'seems.'"  
"'Tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother,"  
"Nor customary suits of solemn black,"  
"Nor windy suspiration of forced breath,"  
"No, nor the fruitful river in the eye,"  
"Nor the dejected 'havior of the visage,"  
"Together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief,"  
"That can denote me truly: these indeed seem,"  
"For they are actions that a man might play:"  
"But I have that within which passeth show,"  
"These but the trappings and the suits of woe."  
"'Tis sweet and commendable in your nature, Hamlet,"  
"To give these mourning duties to your father:"  
"But, you must know, your father lost a father,"  
"That father lost, lost his, and the survivor bound"  
"In filial obligation for some term"  
"To do obsequious sorrow: but to persever"  
"In obstinate condolement is a course"  
"Of impious stubbornness, 'tis unmanly grief,"  
"It shows a will most incorrect to heaven,"  
"A heart unfortified, a mind impatient,"  
"An understanding simple and unschool'd:"  
"For what we know must be and is as common"  
"As any the most vulgar thing to sense,"  
"Why should we in our peevish opposition"  
"Take it to heart? Fie! 'tis a fault to heaven,"  
"A fault against the dead, a fault to nature,"  
"To reason most absurd: whose common theme"  
"Is death of fathers, and who still hath cried,"  
"From the first corse till he that died to-day,"  
"'This must be so.' We pray you, throw to earth"  
"This unprevailing woe, and think of us"  
"As of a father: for let the world take note,"  
"You are the most immediate to our throne,"  
"And with no less nobility of love"  
"Than that which dearest father bears his son,"  
"Do I impart toward you. For your intent"  
"In going back to school in Wittenberg,"  
"It is most retrograde to our desire:"  
"And we beseech you, bend you to remain"  
"Here, in the cheer and comfort of our eye,"  
"Our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son."  
"Let not thy mother lose her prayers, Hamlet:"  
"I pray thee, stay with us, go not to Wittenberg."  
"I shall in all my best obey you, madam."  
"Why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply:"  
"Be as ourself in Denmark. Madam, come,"  
"This gentle and unforced accord of Hamlet"  
"Sits smiling to my heart: in grace whereof,"  
"No jocund health that Denmark drinks to-day,"  
"But the great cannon to the clouds shall tell,"  
"And the king's rouse the heavens all bruit again,"  
"Re-speaking earthly thunder. Come away."  
"Exeunt all but HAMLET"  
"O, that this too too solid flesh would melt"  
"Thaw and resolve itself into a dew!"  
"Or that the Everlasting had not fix'd"  
"His canon 'gainst self-slaughter! O God! God!"  
"How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable,"  
"Seem to me all the uses of this world!"  
"Fie on't! ah fie! 'tis an unweeded garden,"  
"That grows to seed, things rank and gross in nature"  
"Possess it merely. That it should come to this!"  
"But two months dead: nay, not so much, not two:"  
"So excellent a king, that was, to this,"  
"Hyperion to a satyr, so loving to my mother"  
"That he might not beteem the winds of heaven"  
"Visit her face too roughly. Heaven and earth!"  
"Must I remember? why, she would hang on him,"  
"As if increase of appetite had grown"  
"By what it fed on: and yet, within a month--"  
"Let me not think on't--Frailty, thy name is woman!--"  
"A little month, or ere those shoes were old"  
"With which she follow'd my poor father's body,"  
"Like Niobe, all tears:--why she, even she--"  
"O, God! a beast, that wants discourse of reason,"  
"Would have mourn'd longer--married with my uncle,"  
"My father's brother, but no more like my father"  
"Than I to Hercules: within a month:"  
"Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears"  
"Had left the flushing in her galled eyes,"  
"She married. O, most wicked speed, to post"  
"With such dexterity to incestuous sheets!"  
"It is not nor it cannot come to good:"  
"But break, my heart, for I must hold my tongue."  
"Enter HORATIO, MARCELLUS, and BERNARDO"  
"Hail to your lordship!"  
"I am glad to see you well:"  
"Horatio,--or I do forget myself."  
"The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever."  
"Sir, my good friend, I'll change that name with you:"  
"And what make you from Wittenberg, Horatio? Marcellus?"  
"My good lord--"  
"I am very glad to see you. Good even, sir."  
"But what, in faith, make you from Wittenberg?"  
"A truant disposition, good my lord."  
"I would not hear your enemy say so,"  
"Nor shall you do mine ear that violence,"  
"To make it truster of your own report"  
"Against yourself: I know you are no truant."  
"But what is your affair in Elsinore?"  
"We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart."  
"My lord, I came to see your father's funeral."  
"I pray thee, do not mock me, fellow-student,"  
"I think it was to see my mother's wedding."  
"Indeed, my lord, it follow'd hard upon."  
"Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked meats"  
"Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables."  
"Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven"  
"Or ever I had seen that day, Horatio!"  
"My father!--methinks I see my father."  
"Where, my lord?"  
"In my mind's eye, Horatio."  
"I saw him once, he was a goodly king."  
"He was a man, take him for all in all,"  
"I shall not look upon his like again."  
"My lord, I think I saw him yesternight."  
"Saw? who?"  
"My lord, the king your father."  
"The king my father!"  
"Season your admiration for awhile"  
"With an attent ear, till I may deliver,"  
"Upon the witness of these gentlemen,"  
"This marvel to you."  
"For God's love, let me hear."  
"Two nights together had these gentlemen,"  
"Marcellus and Bernardo, on their watch,"  
"In the dead vast and middle of the night,"  
"Been thus encounter'd. A figure like your father,"  
"Armed at point exactly, cap-a-pe,"  
"Appears before them, and with solemn march"  
"Goes slow and stately by them: thrice he walk'd"  
"By their oppress'd and fear-surprised eyes,"  
"Within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled"  
"Almost to jelly with the act of fear,"  
"Stand dumb and speak not to him. This to me"  
"In dreadful secrecy impart they did,"  
"And I with them the third night kept the watch,"  
"Where, as they had deliver'd, both in time,"  
"Form of the thing, each word made true and good,"  
"The apparition comes: I knew your father,"  
"These hands are not more like."  
"But where was this?"  
"My lord, upon the platform where we watch'd."  
"Did you not speak to it?"  
"My lord, I did,"  
"But answer made it none: yet once methought"  
"It lifted up its head and did address"  
"Itself to motion, like as it would speak,"  
"But even then the morning cock crew loud,"  
"And at the sound it shrunk in haste away,"  
"And vanish'd from our sight."  
"'Tis very strange."  
"As I do live, my honour'd lord, 'tis true,"  
"And we did think it writ down in our duty"  
"To let you know of it."  
"Indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me."  
"Hold you the watch to-night?"  
"We do, my lord."  
"Arm'd, say you?"  
"Arm'd, my lord."  
"From top to toe?"  
"My lord, from head to foot."  
"Then saw you not his face?"  
"O, yes, my lord, he wore his beaver up."  
"What, look'd he frowningly?"  
"A countenance more in sorrow than in anger."  
"Pale or red?"  
"Nay, very pale."  
"And fix'd his eyes upon you?"  
"Most constantly."  
"I would I had been there."  
"It would have much amazed you."  
"Very like, very like. Stay'd it long?"  
"While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred."  
"Longer, longer."  
"Not when I saw't."  
"His beard was grizzled--no?"  
"It was, as I have seen it in his life,"  
"A sable silver'd."  
"I will watch to-night,"  
"Perchance 'twill walk again."  
"I warrant it will."  
"If it assume my noble father's person,"  
"I'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape"  
"And bid me hold my peace. I pray you all,"  
"If you have hitherto conceal'd this sight,"  
"Let it be tenable in your silence still,"  
"And whatsoever else shall hap to-night,"  
"Give it an understanding, but no tongue:"  
"I will requite your loves. So, fare you well:"  
"Upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve,"  
"I'll visit you."  
"Our duty to your honour."  
"Your loves, as mine to you: farewell."  
"Exeunt all but HAMLET"  
"My father's spirit in arms! all is not well,"  
"I doubt some foul play: would the night were come!"  
"Till then sit still, my soul: foul deeds will rise,"  
"Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes."  
Exit  
"SCENE III. A room in Polonius' house."  
"Enter LAERTES and OPHELIA"  
"My necessaries are embark'd: farewell:"  
"And, sister, as the winds give benefit"  
"And convoy is assistant, do not sleep,"  
"But let me hear from you."  
"Do you doubt that?"  
"For Hamlet and the trifling of his favour,"  
"Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood,"  
"A violet in the youth of primy nature,"  
"Forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting,"  
"The perfume and suppliance of a minute, No more."  
"No more but so?"  
"Think it no more,"  
"For nature, crescent, does not grow alone"  
"In thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes,"  
"The inward service of the mind and soul"  
"Grows wide withal. Perhaps he loves you now,"  
"And now no soil nor cautel doth besmirch"  
"The virtue of his will: but you must fear,"  
"His greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own,"  
"For he himself is subject to his birth:"  
"He may not, as unvalued persons do,"  
"Carve for himself, for on his choice depends"  
"The safety and health of this whole state,"  
"And therefore must his choice be circumscribed"  
"Unto the voice and yielding of that body"  
"Whereof he is the head. Then if he says he loves you,"  
"It fits your wisdom so far to believe it"  
"As he in his particular act and place"  
"May give his saying deed, which is no further"  
"Than the main voice of Denmark goes withal."  
"Then weigh what loss your honour may sustain,"  
"If with too credent ear you list his songs,"  
"Or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open"  
"To his unmaster'd importunity."  
"Fear it, Ophelia, fear it, my dear sister,"  
"And keep you in the rear of your affection,"  
"Out of the shot and danger of desire."  
"The chariest maid is prodigal enough,"  
"If she unmask her beauty to the moon:"  
"Virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes:"  
"The canker galls the infants of the spring,"  
"Too oft before their buttons be disclosed,"  
"And in the morn and liquid dew of youth"  
"Contagious blastments are most imminent."  
"Be wary then, best safety lies in fear:"  
"Youth to itself rebels, though none else near."  
"I shall the effect of this good lesson keep,"  
"As watchman to my heart. But, good my brother,"  
"Do not, as some ungracious pastors do,"  
"Show me the steep and thorny way to heaven,"  
"Whiles, like a puff'd and reckless libertine,"  
"Himself the primrose path of dalliance treads,"  
"And recks not his own rede."  
"O, fear me not."  
"I stay too long: but here my father comes."  
"Enter POLONIUS"  
"A double blessing is a double grace,"  
"Occasion smiles upon a second leave."  
"Yet here, Laertes! aboard, aboard, for shame!"  
"The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail,"  
"And you are stay'd for. There, my blessing with thee!"  
"And these few precepts in thy memory"  
"See thou character. Give thy thoughts no tongue,"  
"Nor any unproportioned thought his act."  
"Be thou familiar, but by no means vulgar."  
"Those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried,"  
"Grapple them to thy soul with hoops of steel,"  
"But do not dull thy palm with entertainment"  
"Of each new-hatch'd, unfledged comrade. Beware"  
"Of entrance to a quarrel, but being in,"  
"Bear't that the opposed may beware of thee."  
"Give every man thy ear, but few thy voice,"  
"Take each man's censure, but reserve thy judgment."  
"Costly thy habit as thy purse can buy,"  
"But not express'd in fancy, rich, not gaudy,"  
"For the apparel oft proclaims the man,"  
"And they in France of the best rank and station"  
"Are of a most select and generous chief in that."  
"Neither a borrower nor a lender be,"  
"For loan oft loses both itself and friend,"  
"And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry."  
"This above all: to thine ownself be true,"  
"And it must follow, as the night the day,"  
"Thou canst not then be false to any man."  
"Farewell: my blessing season this in thee!"  
"Most humbly do I take my leave, my lord."  
"The time invites you, go, your servants tend."  
"Farewell, Ophelia, and remember well"  
"What I have said to you."  
"'Tis in my memory lock'd,"  
"And you yourself shall keep the key of it."  
Farewell.  
Exit  
"What is't, Ophelia, be hath said to you?"  
"So please you, something touching the Lord Hamlet."  
"Marry, well bethought:"  
"'Tis told me, he hath very oft of late"  
"Given private time to you, and you yourself"  
"Have of your audience been most free and bounteous:"  
"If it be so, as so 'tis put on me,"  
"And that in way of caution, I must tell you,"  
"You do not understand yourself so clearly"  
"As it behoves my daughter and your honour."  
"What is between you? give me up the truth."  
"He hath, my lord, of late made many tenders"  
"Of his affection to me."  
"Affection! pooh! you speak like a green girl,"  
"Unsifted in such perilous circumstance."  
"Do you believe his tenders, as you call them?"  
"I do not know, my lord, what I should think."  
"Marry, I'll teach you: think yourself a baby,"  
"That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay,"  
"Which are not sterling. Tender yourself more dearly,"  
"Or--not to crack the wind of the poor phrase,"  
"Running it thus--you'll tender me a fool."  
"My lord, he hath importuned me with love"  
"In honourable fashion."  
"Ay, fashion you may call it, go to, go to."  
"And hath given countenance to his speech, my lord,"  
"With almost all the holy vows of heaven."  
"Ay, springes to catch woodcocks. I do know,"  
"When the blood burns, how prodigal the soul"  
"Lends the tongue vows: these blazes, daughter,"  
"Giving more light than heat, extinct in both,"  
"Even in their promise, as it is a-making,"  
"You must not take for fire. From this time"  
"Be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence,"  
"Set your entreatments at a higher rate"  
"Than a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,"  
"Believe so much in him, that he is young"  
"And with a larger tether may he walk"  
"Than may be given you: in few, Ophelia,"  
"Do not believe his vows, for they are brokers,"  
"Not of that dye which their investments show,"  
"But mere implorators of unholy suits,"  
"Breathing like sanctified and pious bawds,"  
"The better to beguile. This is for all:"  
"I would not, in plain terms, from this time forth,"  
"Have you so slander any moment leisure,"  
"As to give words or talk with the Lord Hamlet."  
"Look to't, I charge you: come your ways."  
"I shall obey, my lord."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE IV. The platform."  
"Enter HAMLET, HORATIO, and MARCELLUS"  
"The air bites shrewdly, it is very cold."  
"It is a nipping and an eager air."  
"What hour now?"  
"I think it lacks of twelve."  
"No, it is struck."  
"Indeed? I heard it not: then it draws near the season"  
"Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk."  
"A flourish of trumpets, and ordnance shot off, within"  
"What does this mean, my lord?"  
"The king doth wake to-night and takes his rouse,"  
"Keeps wassail, and the swaggering up-spring reels,"  
"And, as he drains his draughts of Rhenish down,"  
"The kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out"  
"The triumph of his pledge."  
"Is it a custom?"  
"Ay, marry, is't:"  
"But to my mind, though I am native here"  
"And to the manner born, it is a custom"  
"More honour'd in the breach than the observance."  
"This heavy-headed revel east and west"  
"Makes us traduced and tax'd of other nations:"  
"They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase"  
"Soil our addition, and indeed it takes"  
"From our achievements, though perform'd at height,"  
"The pith and marrow of our attribute."  
"So, oft it chances in particular men,"  
"That for some vicious mole of nature in them,"  
"As, in their birth--wherein they are not guilty,"  
"Since nature cannot choose his origin--"  
"By the o'ergrowth of some complexion,"  
"Oft breaking down the pales and forts of reason,"  
"Or by some habit that too much o'er-leavens"  
"The form of plausive manners, that these men,"  
"Carrying, I say, the stamp of one defect,"  
"Being nature's livery, or fortune's star,--"  
"Their virtues else--be they as pure as grace,"  
"As infinite as man may undergo--"  
"Shall in the general censure take corruption"  
"From that particular fault: the dram of eale"  
"Doth all the noble substance of a doubt"  
"To his own scandal."  
"Look, my lord, it comes!"  
"Enter Ghost"  
"Angels and ministers of grace defend us!"  
"Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damn'd,"  
"Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell,"  
"Be thy intents wicked or charitable,"  
"Thou comest in such a questionable shape"  
"That I will speak to thee: I'll call thee Hamlet,"  
"King, father, royal Dane: O, answer me!"  
"Let me not burst in ignorance, but tell"  
"Why thy canonized bones, hearsed in death,"  
"Have burst their cerements, why the sepulchre,"  
"Wherein we saw thee quietly inurn'd,"  
"Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws,"  
"To cast thee up again. What may this mean,"  
"That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel"  
"Revisit'st thus the glimpses of the moon,"  
"Making night hideous, and we fools of nature"  
"So horridly to shake our disposition"  
"With thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?"  
"Say, why is this? wherefore? what should we do?"  
"Ghost beckons HAMLET"  
"It beckons you to go away with it,"  
"As if it some impartment did desire"  
"To you alone."  
"Look, with what courteous action"  
"It waves you to a more removed ground:"  
"But do not go with it."  
"No, by no means."  
"It will not speak, then I will follow it."  
"Do not, my lord."  
"Why, what should be the fear?"  
"I do not set my life in a pin's fee,"  
"And for my soul, what can it do to that,"  
"Being a thing immortal as itself?"  
"It waves me forth again: I'll follow it."  
"What if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord,"  
"Or to the dreadful summit of the cliff"  
"That beetles o'er his base into the sea,"  
"And there assume some other horrible form,"  
"Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason"  
"And draw you into madness? think of it:"  
"The very place puts toys of desperation,"  
"Without more motive, into every brain"  
"That looks so many fathoms to the sea"  
"And hears it roar beneath."  
"It waves me still."  
"Go on, I'll follow thee."  
"You shall not go, my lord."  
"Hold off your hands."  
"Be ruled, you shall not go."  
"My fate cries out,"  
"And makes each petty artery in this body"  
"As hardy as the Nemean lion's nerve."  
"Still am I call'd. Unhand me, gentlemen."  
"By heaven, I'll make a ghost of him that lets me!"  
"I say, away! Go on, I'll follow thee."  
"Exeunt Ghost and HAMLET"  
"He waxes desperate with imagination."  
"Let's follow, 'tis not fit thus to obey him."  
"Have after. To what issue will this come?"  
"Something is rotten in the state of Denmark."  
"Heaven will direct it."  
"Nay, let's follow him."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE V. Another part of the platform."  
"Enter GHOST and HAMLET"  
"Where wilt thou lead me? speak, I'll go no further."  
"Mark me."  
"I will."  
"My hour is almost come,"  
"When I to sulphurous and tormenting flames"  
"Must render up myself."  
"Alas, poor ghost!"  
"Pity me not, but lend thy serious hearing"  
"To what I shall unfold."  
"Speak, I am bound to hear."  
"So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear."  
What?  
"I am thy father's spirit,"  
"Doom'd for a certain term to walk the night,"  
"And for the day confined to fast in fires,"  
"Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature"  
"Are burnt and purged away. But that I am forbid"  
"To tell the secrets of my prison-house,"  
"I could a tale unfold whose lightest word"  
"Would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,"  
"Make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres,"  
"Thy knotted and combined locks to part"  
"And each particular hair to stand on end,"  
"Like quills upon the fretful porpentine:"  
"But this eternal blazon must not be"  
"To ears of flesh and blood. List, list, O, list!"  
"If thou didst ever thy dear father love--"  
"O God!"  
"Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder."  
Murder!  
"Murder most foul, as in the best it is,"  
"But this most foul, strange and unnatural."  
"Haste me to know't, that I, with wings as swift"  
"As meditation or the thoughts of love,"  
"May sweep to my revenge."  
"I find thee apt,"  
"And duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed"  
"That roots itself in ease on Lethe wharf,"  
"Wouldst thou not stir in this. Now, Hamlet, hear:"  
"'Tis given out that, sleeping in my orchard,"  
"A serpent stung me, so the whole ear of Denmark"  
"Is by a forged process of my death"  
"Rankly abused: but know, thou noble youth,"  
"The serpent that did sting thy father's life"  
"Now wears his crown."  
"O my prophetic soul! My uncle!"  
"Ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast,"  
"With witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts,--"  
"O wicked wit and gifts, that have the power"  
"So to seduce!--won to his shameful lust"  
"The will of my most seeming-virtuous queen:"  
"O Hamlet, what a falling-off was there!"  
"From me, whose love was of that dignity"  
"That it went hand in hand even with the vow"  
"I made to her in marriage, and to decline"  
"Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor"  
"To those of mine!"  
"But virtue, as it never will be moved,"  
"Though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven,"  
"So lust, though to a radiant angel link'd,"  
"Will sate itself in a celestial bed,"  
"And prey on garbage."  
"But, soft! methinks I scent the morning air,"  
"Brief let me be. Sleeping within my orchard,"  
"My custom always of the afternoon,"  
"Upon my secure hour thy uncle stole,"  
"With juice of cursed hebenon in a vial,"  
"And in the porches of my ears did pour"  
"The leperous distilment, whose effect"  
"Holds such an enmity with blood of man"  
"That swift as quicksilver it courses through"  
"The natural gates and alleys of the body,"  
"And with a sudden vigour doth posset"  
"And curd, like eager droppings into milk,"  
"The thin and wholesome blood: so did it mine,"  
"And a most instant tetter bark'd about,"  
"Most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust,"  
"All my smooth body."  
"Thus was I, sleeping, by a brother's hand"  
"Of life, of crown, of queen, at once dispatch'd:"  
"Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,"  
"Unhousel'd, disappointed, unanel'd,"  
"No reckoning made, but sent to my account"  
"With all my imperfections on my head:"  
"O, horrible! O, horrible! most horrible!"  
"If thou hast nature in thee, bear it not,"  
"Let not the royal bed of Denmark be"  
"A couch for luxury and damned incest."  
"But, howsoever thou pursuest this act,"  
"Taint not thy mind, nor let thy soul contrive"  
"Against thy mother aught: leave her to heaven"  
"And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge,"  
"To prick and sting her. Fare thee well at once!"  
"The glow-worm shows the matin to be near,"  
"And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire:"  
"Adieu, adieu! Hamlet, remember me."  
Exit  
"O all you host of heaven! O earth! what else?"  
"And shall I couple hell? O, fie! Hold, hold, my heart,"  
"And you, my sinews, grow not instant old,"  
"But bear me stiffly up. Remember thee!"  
"Ay, thou poor ghost, while memory holds a seat"  
"In this distracted globe. Remember thee!"  
"Yea, from the table of my memory"  
"I'll wipe away all trivial fond records,"  
"All saws of books, all forms, all pressures past,"  
"That youth and observation copied there,"  
"And thy commandment all alone shall live"  
"Within the book and volume of my brain,"  
"Unmix'd with baser matter: yes, by heaven!"  
"O most pernicious woman!"  
"O villain, villain, smiling, damned villain!"  
"My tables,--meet it is I set it down,"  
"That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain,"  
"At least I'm sure it may be so in Denmark:"  
Writing  
"So, uncle, there you are. Now to my word,"  
"It is 'Adieu, adieu! remember me.'"  
"I have sworn 't."  
"[Within]  My lord, my lord,--"  
"[Within]	Lord Hamlet,--"  
"[Within]	Heaven secure him!"  
"So be it!"  
"[Within]  Hillo, ho, ho, my lord!"  
"Hillo, ho, ho, boy! come, bird, come."  
"Enter HORATIO and MARCELLUS"  
"How is't, my noble lord?"  
"What news, my lord?"  
"O, wonderful!"  
"Good my lord, tell it."  
"No, you'll reveal it."  
"Not I, my lord, by heaven."  
"Nor I, my lord."  
"How say you, then, would heart of man once think it?"  
"But you'll be secret?"  
"Ay, by heaven, my lord."  
"There's ne'er a villain dwelling in all Denmark"  
"But he's an arrant knave."  
"There needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave"  
"To tell us this."  
"Why, right, you are i' the right,"  
"And so, without more circumstance at all,"  
"I hold it fit that we shake hands and part:"  
"You, as your business and desire shall point you,"  
"For every man has business and desire,"  
"Such as it is, and for mine own poor part,"  
"Look you, I'll go pray."  
"These are but wild and whirling words, my lord."  
"I'm sorry they offend you, heartily,"  
"Yes, 'faith heartily."  
"There's no offence, my lord."  
"Yes, by Saint Patrick, but there is, Horatio,"  
"And much offence too. Touching this vision here,"  
"It is an honest ghost, that let me tell you:"  
"For your desire to know what is between us,"  
"O'ermaster 't as you may. And now, good friends,"  
"As you are friends, scholars and soldiers,"  
"Give me one poor request."  
"What is't, my lord? we will."  
"Never make known what you have seen to-night."  
"My lord, we will not."  
"Nay, but swear't."  
"In faith,"  
"My lord, not I."  
"Nor I, my lord, in faith."  
"Upon my sword."  
"We have sworn, my lord, already."  
"Indeed, upon my sword, indeed."  
"[Beneath]  Swear."  
"Ah, ha, boy! say'st thou so? art thou there,"  
truepenny?  
"Come on--you hear this fellow in the cellarage--"  
"Consent to swear."  
"Propose the oath, my lord."  
"Never to speak of this that you have seen,"  
"Swear by my sword."  
"[Beneath]  Swear."  
"Hic et ubique? then we'll shift our ground."  
"Come hither, gentlemen,"  
"And lay your hands again upon my sword:"  
"Never to speak of this that you have heard,"  
"Swear by my sword."  
"[Beneath]  Swear."  
"Well said, old mole! canst work i' the earth so fast?"  
"A worthy pioner! Once more remove, good friends."  
"O day and night, but this is wondrous strange!"  
"And therefore as a stranger give it welcome."  
"There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,"  
"Than are dreamt of in your philosophy. But come,"  
"Here, as before, never, so help you mercy,"  
"How strange or odd soe'er I bear myself,"  
"As I perchance hereafter shall think meet"  
"To put an antic disposition on,"  
"That you, at such times seeing me, never shall,"  
"With arms encumber'd thus, or this headshake,"  
"Or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase,"  
"As 'Well, well, we know,' or 'We could, an if we would,'"  
"Or 'If we list to speak,' or 'There be, an if they might,'"  
"Or such ambiguous giving out, to note"  
"That you know aught of me: this not to do,"  
"So grace and mercy at your most need help you, Swear."  
"[Beneath]  Swear."  
"Rest, rest, perturbed spirit!"  
"They swear"  
"So, gentlemen,"  
"With all my love I do commend me to you:"  
"And what so poor a man as Hamlet is"  
"May do, to express his love and friending to you,"  
"God willing, shall not lack. Let us go in together,"  
"And still your fingers on your lips, I pray."  
"The time is out of joint: O cursed spite,"  
"That ever I was born to set it right!"  
"Nay, come, let's go together."  
Exeunt  
"ACT II"  
"SCENE I. A room in POLONIUS' house."  
"Enter POLONIUS and REYNALDO"  
"Give him this money and these notes, Reynaldo."  
"I will, my lord."  
"You shall do marvellous wisely, good Reynaldo,"  
"Before you visit him, to make inquire"  
"Of his behavior."  
"My lord, I did intend it."  
"Marry, well said, very well said. Look you, sir,"  
"Inquire me first what Danskers are in Paris,"  
"And how, and who, what means, and where they keep,"  
"What company, at what expense, and finding"  
"By this encompassment and drift of question"  
"That they do know my son, come you more nearer"  
"Than your particular demands will touch it:"  
"Take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him,"  
"As thus, 'I know his father and his friends,"  
"And in part him: ' do you mark this, Reynaldo?"  
"Ay, very well, my lord."  
"'And in part him, but' you may say 'not well:"  
"But, if't be he I mean, he's very wild,"  
"Addicted so and so:' and there put on him"  
"What forgeries you please, marry, none so rank"  
"As may dishonour him, take heed of that,"  
"But, sir, such wanton, wild and usual slips"  
"As are companions noted and most known"  
"To youth and liberty."  
"As gaming, my lord."  
"Ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling,"  
"Drabbing: you may go so far."  
"My lord, that would dishonour him."  
"'Faith, no, as you may season it in the charge"  
"You must not put another scandal on him,"  
"That he is open to incontinency,"  
"That's not my meaning: but breathe his faults so quaintly"  
"That they may seem the taints of liberty,"  
"The flash and outbreak of a fiery mind,"  
"A savageness in unreclaimed blood,"  
"Of general assault."  
"But, my good lord,--"  
"Wherefore should you do this?"  
"Ay, my lord,"  
"I would know that."  
"Marry, sir, here's my drift,"  
"And I believe, it is a fetch of wit:"  
"You laying these slight sullies on my son,"  
"As 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' the working, Mark you,"  
"Your party in converse, him you would sound,"  
"Having ever seen in the prenominate crimes"  
"The youth you breathe of guilty, be assured"  
"He closes with you in this consequence,"  
"'Good sir,' or so, or 'friend,' or 'gentleman,'"  
"According to the phrase or the addition"  
"Of man and country."  
"Very good, my lord."  
"And then, sir, does he this--he does--what was I"  
"about to say? By the mass, I was about to say"  
"something: where did I leave?"  
"At 'closes in the consequence,' at 'friend or so,'"  
"and 'gentleman.'"  
"At 'closes in the consequence,' ay, marry,"  
"He closes thus: 'I know the gentleman,"  
"I saw him yesterday, or t' other day,"  
"Or then, or then, with such, or such, and, as you say,"  
"There was a' gaming, there o'ertook in's rouse,"  
"There falling out at tennis:' or perchance,"  
"'I saw him enter such a house of sale,'"  
"Videlicet, a brothel, or so forth."  
"See you now,"  
"Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth:"  
"And thus do we of wisdom and of reach,"  
"With windlasses and with assays of bias,"  
"By indirections find directions out:"  
"So by my former lecture and advice,"  
"Shall you my son. You have me, have you not?"  
"My lord, I have."  
"God be wi' you, fare you well."  
"Good my lord!"  
"Observe his inclination in yourself."  
"I shall, my lord."  
"And let him ply his music."  
"Well, my lord."  
Farewell!  
"Exit REYNALDO"  
"Enter OPHELIA"  
"How now, Ophelia! what's the matter?"  
"O, my lord, my lord, I have been so affrighted!"  
"With what, i' the name of God?"  
"My lord, as I was sewing in my closet,"  
"Lord Hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced,"  
"No hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd,"  
"Ungarter'd, and down-gyved to his ancle,"  
"Pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other,"  
"And with a look so piteous in purport"  
"As if he had been loosed out of hell"  
"To speak of horrors,--he comes before me."  
"Mad for thy love?"  
"My lord, I do not know,"  
"But truly, I do fear it."  
"What said he?"  
"He took me by the wrist and held me hard,"  
"Then goes he to the length of all his arm,"  
"And, with his other hand thus o'er his brow,"  
"He falls to such perusal of my face"  
"As he would draw it. Long stay'd he so,"  
"At last, a little shaking of mine arm"  
"And thrice his head thus waving up and down,"  
"He raised a sigh so piteous and profound"  
"As it did seem to shatter all his bulk"  
"And end his being: that done, he lets me go:"  
"And, with his head over his shoulder turn'd,"  
"He seem'd to find his way without his eyes,"  
"For out o' doors he went without their helps,"  
"And, to the last, bended their light on me."  
"Come, go with me: I will go seek the king."  
"This is the very ecstasy of love,"  
"Whose violent property fordoes itself"  
"And leads the will to desperate undertakings"  
"As oft as any passion under heaven"  
"That does afflict our natures. I am sorry."  
"What, have you given him any hard words of late?"  
"No, my good lord, but, as you did command,"  
"I did repel his fetters and denied"  
"His access to me."  
"That hath made him mad."  
"I am sorry that with better heed and judgment"  
"I had not quoted him: I fear'd he did but trifle,"  
"And meant to wreck thee, but, beshrew my jealousy!"  
"By heaven, it is as proper to our age"  
"To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions"  
"As it is common for the younger sort"  
"To lack discretion. Come, go we to the king:"  
"This must be known, which, being kept close, might"  
move  
"More grief to hide than hate to utter love."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. A room in the castle."  
"Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, and Attendants"  
"Welcome, dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern!"  
"Moreover that we much did long to see you,"  
"The need we have to use you did provoke"  
"Our hasty sending. Something have you heard"  
"Of Hamlet's transformation, so call it,"  
"Sith nor the exterior nor the inward man"  
"Resembles that it was. What it should be,"  
"More than his father's death, that thus hath put him"  
"So much from the understanding of himself,"  
"I cannot dream of: I entreat you both,"  
"That, being of so young days brought up with him,"  
"And sith so neighbour'd to his youth and havior,"  
"That you vouchsafe your rest here in our court"  
"Some little time: so by your companies"  
"To draw him on to pleasures, and to gather,"  
"So much as from occasion you may glean,"  
"Whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus,"  
"That, open'd, lies within our remedy."  
"Good gentlemen, he hath much talk'd of you,"  
"And sure I am two men there are not living"  
"To whom he more adheres. If it will please you"  
"To show us so much gentry and good will"  
"As to expend your time with us awhile,"  
"For the supply and profit of our hope,"  
"Your visitation shall receive such thanks"  
"As fits a king's remembrance."  
"Both your majesties"  
"Might, by the sovereign power you have of us,"  
"Put your dread pleasures more into command"  
"Than to entreaty."  
"But we both obey,"  
"And here give up ourselves, in the full bent"  
"To lay our service freely at your feet,"  
"To be commanded."  
"Thanks, Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern."  
"Thanks, Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz:"  
"And I beseech you instantly to visit"  
"My too much changed son. Go, some of you,"  
"And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is."  
"Heavens make our presence and our practises"  
"Pleasant and helpful to him!"  
"Ay, amen!"  
"Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, and some Attendants"  
"Enter POLONIUS"  
"The ambassadors from Norway, my good lord,"  
"Are joyfully return'd."  
"Thou still hast been the father of good news."  
"Have I, my lord? I assure my good liege,"  
"I hold my duty, as I hold my soul,"  
"Both to my God and to my gracious king:"  
"And I do think, or else this brain of mine"  
"Hunts not the trail of policy so sure"  
"As it hath used to do, that I have found"  
"The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy."  
"O, speak of that, that do I long to hear."  
"Give first admittance to the ambassadors,"  
"My news shall be the fruit to that great feast."  
"Thyself do grace to them, and bring them in."  
"Exit POLONIUS"  
"He tells me, my dear Gertrude, he hath found"  
"The head and source of all your son's distemper."  
"I doubt it is no other but the main,"  
"His father's death, and our o'erhasty marriage."  
"Well, we shall sift him."  
"Re-enter POLONIUS, with VOLTIMAND and CORNELIUS"  
"Welcome, my good friends!"  
"Say, Voltimand, what from our brother Norway?"  
"Most fair return of greetings and desires."  
"Upon our first, he sent out to suppress"  
"His nephew's levies, which to him appear'd"  
"To be a preparation 'gainst the Polack,"  
"But, better look'd into, he truly found"  
"It was against your highness: whereat grieved,"  
"That so his sickness, age and impotence"  
"Was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests"  
"On Fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys,"  
"Receives rebuke from Norway, and in fine"  
"Makes vow before his uncle never more"  
"To give the assay of arms against your majesty."  
"Whereon old Norway, overcome with joy,"  
"Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee,"  
"And his commission to employ those soldiers,"  
"So levied as before, against the Polack:"  
"With an entreaty, herein further shown,"  
"Giving a paper"  
"That it might please you to give quiet pass"  
"Through your dominions for this enterprise,"  
"On such regards of safety and allowance"  
"As therein are set down."  
"It likes us well,"  
"And at our more consider'd time well read,"  
"Answer, and think upon this business."  
"Meantime we thank you for your well-took labour:"  
"Go to your rest, at night we'll feast together:"  
"Most welcome home!"  
"Exeunt VOLTIMAND and CORNELIUS"  
"This business is well ended."  
"My liege, and madam, to expostulate"  
"What majesty should be, what duty is,"  
"Why day is day, night night, and time is time,"  
"Were nothing but to waste night, day and time."  
"Therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit,"  
"And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes,"  
"I will be brief: your noble son is mad:"  
"Mad call I it, for, to define true madness,"  
"What is't but to be nothing else but mad?"  
"But let that go."  
"More matter, with less art."  
"Madam, I swear I use no art at all."  
"That he is mad, 'tis true: 'tis true 'tis pity,"  
"And pity 'tis 'tis true: a foolish figure,"  
"But farewell it, for I will use no art."  
"Mad let us grant him, then: and now remains"  
"That we find out the cause of this effect,"  
"Or rather say, the cause of this defect,"  
"For this effect defective comes by cause:"  
"Thus it remains, and the remainder thus. Perpend."  
"I have a daughter--have while she is mine--"  
"Who, in her duty and obedience, mark,"  
"Hath given me this: now gather, and surmise."  
Reads  
"'To the celestial and my soul's idol, the most"  
"beautified Ophelia,'--"  
"That's an ill phrase, a vile phrase, 'beautified' is"  
"a vile phrase: but you shall hear. Thus:"  
Reads  
"'In her excellent white bosom, these,  and c.'"  
"Came this from Hamlet to her?"  
"Good madam, stay awhile, I will be faithful."  
Reads  
"'Doubt thou the stars are fire,"  
"Doubt that the sun doth move,"  
"Doubt truth to be a liar,"  
"But never doubt I love."  
"'O dear Ophelia, I am ill at these numbers,"  
"I have not art to reckon my groans: but that"  
"I love thee best, O most best, believe it. Adieu."  
"'Thine evermore most dear lady, whilst"  
"this machine is to him, HAMLET.'"  
"This, in obedience, hath my daughter shown me,"  
"And more above, hath his solicitings,"  
"As they fell out by time, by means and place,"  
"All given to mine ear."  
"But how hath she"  
"Received his love?"  
"What do you think of me?"  
"As of a man faithful and honourable."  
"I would fain prove so. But what might you think,"  
"When I had seen this hot love on the wing--"  
"As I perceived it, I must tell you that,"  
"Before my daughter told me--what might you,"  
"Or my dear majesty your queen here, think,"  
"If I had play'd the desk or table-book,"  
"Or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb,"  
"Or look'd upon this love with idle sight,"  
"What might you think? No, I went round to work,"  
"And my young mistress thus I did bespeak:"  
"'Lord Hamlet is a prince, out of thy star,"  
"This must not be:' and then I precepts gave her,"  
"That she should lock herself from his resort,"  
"Admit no messengers, receive no tokens."  
"Which done, she took the fruits of my advice,"  
"And he, repulsed--a short tale to make--"  
"Fell into a sadness, then into a fast,"  
"Thence to a watch, thence into a weakness,"  
"Thence to a lightness, and, by this declension,"  
"Into the madness wherein now he raves,"  
"And all we mourn for."  
"Do you think 'tis this?"  
"It may be, very likely."  
"Hath there been such a time--I'd fain know that--"  
"That I have positively said 'Tis so,'"  
"When it proved otherwise?"  
"Not that I know."  
"[Pointing to his head and shoulder]"  
"Take this from this, if this be otherwise:"  
"If circumstances lead me, I will find"  
"Where truth is hid, though it were hid indeed"  
"Within the centre."  
"How may we try it further?"  
"You know, sometimes he walks four hours together"  
"Here in the lobby."  
"So he does indeed."  
"At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him:"  
"Be you and I behind an arras then,"  
"Mark the encounter: if he love her not"  
"And be not from his reason fall'n thereon,"  
"Let me be no assistant for a state,"  
"But keep a farm and carters."  
"We will try it."  
"But, look, where sadly the poor wretch comes reading."  
"Away, I do beseech you, both away:"  
"I'll board him presently."  
"Exeunt KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, and Attendants"  
"Enter HAMLET, reading"  
"O, give me leave:"  
"How does my good Lord Hamlet?"  
"Well, God-a-mercy."  
"Do you know me, my lord?"  
"Excellent well, you are a fishmonger."  
"Not I, my lord."  
"Then I would you were so honest a man."  
"Honest, my lord!"  
"Ay, sir, to be honest, as this world goes, is to be"  
"one man picked out of ten thousand."  
"That's very true, my lord."  
"For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a"  
"god kissing carrion,--Have you a daughter?"  
"I have, my lord."  
"Let her not walk i' the sun: conception is a"  
"blessing: but not as your daughter may conceive."  
"Friend, look to 't."  
"[Aside]  How say you by that? Still harping on my"  
"daughter: yet he knew me not at first, he said I"  
"was a fishmonger: he is far gone, far gone: and"  
"truly in my youth I suffered much extremity for"  
"love, very near this. I'll speak to him again."  
"What do you read, my lord?"  
"Words, words, words."  
"What is the matter, my lord?"  
"Between who?"  
"I mean, the matter that you read, my lord."  
"Slanders, sir: for the satirical rogue says here"  
"that old men have grey beards, that their faces are"  
"wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and"  
"plum-tree gum and that they have a plentiful lack of"  
"wit, together with most weak hams: all which, sir,"  
"though I most powerfully and potently believe, yet"  
"I hold it not honesty to have it thus set down, for"  
"yourself, sir, should be old as I am, if like a crab"  
"you could go backward."  
"[Aside]  Though this be madness, yet there is method"  
"in 't. Will you walk out of the air, my lord?"  
"Into my grave."  
"Indeed, that is out o' the air."  
Aside  
"How pregnant sometimes his replies are! a happiness"  
"that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity"  
"could not so prosperously be delivered of. I will"  
"leave him, and suddenly contrive the means of"  
"meeting between him and my daughter.--My honourable"  
"lord, I will most humbly take my leave of you."  
"You cannot, sir, take from me any thing that I will"  
"more willingly part withal: except my life, except"  
"my life, except my life."  
"Fare you well, my lord."  
"These tedious old fools!"  
"Enter ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN"  
"You go to seek the Lord Hamlet, there he is."  
"[To POLONIUS]  God save you, sir!"  
"Exit POLONIUS"  
"My honoured lord!"  
"My most dear lord!"  
"My excellent good friends! How dost thou,"  
"Guildenstern? Ah, Rosencrantz! Good lads, how do ye both?"  
"As the indifferent children of the earth."  
"Happy, in that we are not over-happy,"  
"On fortune's cap we are not the very button."  
"Nor the soles of her shoe?"  
"Neither, my lord."  
"Then you live about her waist, or in the middle of"  
"her favours?"  
"'Faith, her privates we."  
"In the secret parts of fortune? O, most true, she"  
"is a strumpet. What's the news?"  
"None, my lord, but that the world's grown honest."  
"Then is doomsday near: but your news is not true."  
"Let me question more in particular: what have you,"  
"my good friends, deserved at the hands of fortune,"  
"that she sends you to prison hither?"  
"Prison, my lord!"  
"Denmark's a prison."  
"Then is the world one."  
"A goodly one, in which there are many confines,"  
"wards and dungeons, Denmark being one o' the worst."  
"We think not so, my lord."  
"Why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is nothing"  
"either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me"  
"it is a prison."  
"Why then, your ambition makes it one, 'tis too"  
"narrow for your mind."  
"O God, I could be bounded in a nut shell and count"  
"myself a king of infinite space, were it not that I"  
"have bad dreams."  
"Which dreams indeed are ambition, for the very"  
"substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream."  
"A dream itself is but a shadow."  
"Truly, and I hold ambition of so airy and light a"  
"quality that it is but a shadow's shadow."  
"Then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and"  
"outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows. Shall we"  
"to the court? for, by my fay, I cannot reason."  
"We'll wait upon you."  
"No such matter: I will not sort you with the rest"  
"of my servants, for, to speak to you like an honest"  
"man, I am most dreadfully attended. But, in the"  
"beaten way of friendship, what make you at Elsinore?"  
"To visit you, my lord, no other occasion."  
"Beggar that I am, I am even poor in thanks, but I"  
"thank you: and sure, dear friends, my thanks are"  
"too dear a halfpenny. Were you not sent for? Is it"  
"your own inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come,"  
"deal justly with me: come, come, nay, speak."  
"What should we say, my lord?"  
"Why, any thing, but to the purpose. You were sent"  
"for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks"  
"which your modesties have not craft enough to colour:"  
"I know the good king and queen have sent for you."  
"To what end, my lord?"  
"That you must teach me. But let me conjure you, by"  
"the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of"  
"our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved"  
"love, and by what more dear a better proposer could"  
"charge you withal, be even and direct with me,"  
"whether you were sent for, or no?"  
"[Aside to GUILDENSTERN]  What say you?"  
"[Aside]  Nay, then, I have an eye of you.--If you"  
"love me, hold not off."  
"My lord, we were sent for."  
"I will tell you why, so shall my anticipation"  
"prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king"  
"and queen moult no feather. I have of late--but"  
"wherefore I know not--lost all my mirth, forgone all"  
"custom of exercises, and indeed it goes so heavily"  
"with my disposition that this goodly frame, the"  
"earth, seems to me a sterile promontory, this most"  
"excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave"  
"o'erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted"  
"with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to"  
"me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapours."  
"What a piece of work is a man! how noble in reason!"  
"how infinite in faculty! in form and moving how"  
"express and admirable! in action how like an angel!"  
"in apprehension how like a god! the beauty of the"  
"world! the paragon of animals! And yet, to me,"  
"what is this quintessence of dust? man delights not"  
"me: no, nor woman neither, though by your smiling"  
"you seem to say so."  
"My lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts."  
"Why did you laugh then, when I said 'man delights not me'?"  
"To think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what"  
"lenten entertainment the players shall receive from"  
"you: we coted them on the way, and hither are they"  
"coming, to offer you service."  
"He that plays the king shall be welcome, his majesty"  
"shall have tribute of me, the adventurous knight"  
"shall use his foil and target, the lover shall not"  
"sigh gratis, the humourous man shall end his part"  
"in peace, the clown shall make those laugh whose"  
"lungs are tickled o' the sere, and the lady shall"  
"say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt"  
"for't. What players are they?"  
"Even those you were wont to take delight in, the"  
"tragedians of the city."  
"How chances it they travel? their residence, both"  
"in reputation and profit, was better both ways."  
"I think their inhibition comes by the means of the"  
"late innovation."  
"Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was"  
"in the city? are they so followed?"  
"No, indeed, are they not."  
"How comes it? do they grow rusty?"  
"Nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace: but"  
"there is, sir, an aery of children, little eyases,"  
"that cry out on the top of question, and are most"  
"tyrannically clapped for't: these are now the"  
"fashion, and so berattle the common stages--so they"  
"call them--that many wearing rapiers are afraid of"  
"goose-quills and dare scarce come thither."  
"What, are they children? who maintains 'em? how are"  
"they escoted? Will they pursue the quality no"  
"longer than they can sing? will they not say"  
"afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common"  
"players--as it is most like, if their means are no"  
"better--their writers do them wrong, to make them"  
"exclaim against their own succession?"  
"'Faith, there has been much to do on both sides, and"  
"the nation holds it no sin to tarre them to"  
"controversy: there was, for a while, no money bid"  
"for argument, unless the poet and the player went to"  
"cuffs in the question."  
"Is't possible?"  
"O, there has been much throwing about of brains."  
"Do the boys carry it away?"  
"Ay, that they do, my lord, Hercules and his load too."  
"It is not very strange, for mine uncle is king of"  
"Denmark, and those that would make mows at him while"  
"my father lived, give twenty, forty, fifty, an"  
"hundred ducats a-piece for his picture in little."  
"'Sblood, there is something in this more than"  
"natural, if philosophy could find it out."  
"Flourish of trumpets within"  
"There are the players."  
"Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore. Your hands,"  
"come then: the appurtenance of welcome is fashion"  
"and ceremony: let me comply with you in this garb,"  
"lest my extent to the players, which, I tell you,"  
"must show fairly outward, should more appear like"  
"entertainment than yours. You are welcome: but my"  
"uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived."  
"In what, my dear lord?"  
"I am but mad north-north-west: when the wind is"  
"southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw."  
"Enter POLONIUS"  
"Well be with you, gentlemen!"  
"Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too: at each ear a"  
"hearer: that great baby you see there is not yet"  
"out of his swaddling-clouts."  
"Happily he's the second time come to them, for they"  
"say an old man is twice a child."  
"I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players,"  
"mark it. You say right, sir: o' Monday morning,"  
"'twas so indeed."  
"My lord, I have news to tell you."  
"My lord, I have news to tell you."  
"When Roscius was an actor in Rome,--"  
"The actors are come hither, my lord."  
"Buz, buz!"  
"Upon mine honour,--"  
"Then came each actor on his ass,--"  
"The best actors in the world, either for tragedy,"  
"comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,"  
"historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-"  
"comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or"  
"poem unlimited: Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor"  
"Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the"  
"liberty, these are the only men."  
"O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure hadst thou!"  
"What a treasure had he, my lord?"  
Why,  
"'One fair daughter and no more,"  
"The which he loved passing well.'"  
"[Aside]  Still on my daughter."  
"Am I not i' the right, old Jephthah?"  
"If you call me Jephthah, my lord, I have a daughter"  
"that I love passing well."  
"Nay, that follows not."  
"What follows, then, my lord?"  
Why,  
"'As by lot, God wot,'"  
"and then, you know,"  
"'It came to pass, as most like it was,'--"  
"the first row of the pious chanson will show you"  
"more, for look, where my abridgement comes."  
"Enter four or five Players"  
"You are welcome, masters, welcome, all. I am glad"  
"to see thee well. Welcome, good friends. O, my old"  
"friend! thy face is valenced since I saw thee last:"  
"comest thou to beard me in Denmark? What, my young"  
"lady and mistress! By'r lady, your ladyship is"  
"nearer to heaven than when I saw you last, by the"  
"altitude of a chopine. Pray God, your voice, like"  
"apiece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the"  
"ring. Masters, you are all welcome. We'll e'en"  
"to't like French falconers, fly at any thing we see:"  
"we'll have a speech straight: come, give us a taste"  
"of your quality, come, a passionate speech."  
"What speech, my lord?"  
"I heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was"  
"never acted, or, if it was, not above once, for the"  
"play, I remember, pleased not the million, 'twas"  
"caviare to the general: but it was--as I received"  
"it, and others, whose judgments in such matters"  
"cried in the top of mine--an excellent play, well"  
"digested in the scenes, set down with as much"  
"modesty as cunning. I remember, one said there"  
"were no sallets in the lines to make the matter"  
"savoury, nor no matter in the phrase that might"  
"indict the author of affectation, but called it an"  
"honest method, as wholesome as sweet, and by very"  
"much more handsome than fine. One speech in it I"  
"chiefly loved: 'twas Aeneas' tale to Dido, and"  
"thereabout of it especially, where he speaks of"  
"Priam's slaughter: if it live in your memory, begin"  
"at this line: let me see, let me see--"  
"'The rugged Pyrrhus, like the Hyrcanian beast,'--"  
"it is not so:--it begins with Pyrrhus:--"  
"'The rugged Pyrrhus, he whose sable arms,"  
"Black as his purpose, did the night resemble"  
"When he lay couched in the ominous horse,"  
"Hath now this dread and black complexion smear'd"  
"With heraldry more dismal, head to foot"  
"Now is he total gules, horridly trick'd"  
"With blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons,"  
"Baked and impasted with the parching streets,"  
"That lend a tyrannous and damned light"  
"To their lord's murder: roasted in wrath and fire,"  
"And thus o'er-sized with coagulate gore,"  
"With eyes like carbuncles, the hellish Pyrrhus"  
"Old grandsire Priam seeks.'"  
"So, proceed you."  
"'Fore God, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and"  
"good discretion."  
"'Anon he finds him"  
"Striking too short at Greeks, his antique sword,"  
"Rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls,"  
"Repugnant to command: unequal match'd,"  
"Pyrrhus at Priam drives, in rage strikes wide,"  
"But with the whiff and wind of his fell sword"  
"The unnerved father falls. Then senseless Ilium,"  
"Seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top"  
"Stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash"  
"Takes prisoner Pyrrhus' ear: for, lo! his sword,"  
"Which was declining on the milky head"  
"Of reverend Priam, seem'd i' the air to stick:"  
"So, as a painted tyrant, Pyrrhus stood,"  
"And like a neutral to his will and matter,"  
"Did nothing."  
"But, as we often see, against some storm,"  
"A silence in the heavens, the rack stand still,"  
"The bold winds speechless and the orb below"  
"As hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder"  
"Doth rend the region, so, after Pyrrhus' pause,"  
"Aroused vengeance sets him new a-work,"  
"And never did the Cyclops' hammers fall"  
"On Mars's armour forged for proof eterne"  
"With less remorse than Pyrrhus' bleeding sword"  
"Now falls on Priam."  
"Out, out, thou strumpet, Fortune! All you gods,"  
"In general synod 'take away her power,"  
"Break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel,"  
"And bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,"  
"As low as to the fiends!'"  
"This is too long."  
"It shall to the barber's, with your beard. Prithee,"  
"say on: he's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he"  
"sleeps: say on: come to Hecuba."  
"'But who, O, who had seen the mobled queen--'"  
"'The mobled queen?'"  
"That's good, 'mobled queen' is good."  
"'Run barefoot up and down, threatening the flames"  
"With bisson rheum, a clout upon that head"  
"Where late the diadem stood, and for a robe,"  
"About her lank and all o'er-teemed loins,"  
"A blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up,"  
"Who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd,"  
"'Gainst Fortune's state would treason have"  
pronounced:  
"But if the gods themselves did see her then"  
"When she saw Pyrrhus make malicious sport"  
"In mincing with his sword her husband's limbs,"  
"The instant burst of clamour that she made,"  
"Unless things mortal move them not at all,"  
"Would have made milch the burning eyes of heaven,"  
"And passion in the gods.'"  
"Look, whether he has not turned his colour and has"  
"tears in's eyes. Pray you, no more."  
"'Tis well: I'll have thee speak out the rest soon."  
"Good my lord, will you see the players well"  
"bestowed? Do you hear, let them be well used, for"  
"they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the"  
"time: after your death you were better have a bad"  
"epitaph than their ill report while you live."  
"My lord, I will use them according to their desert."  
"God's bodykins, man, much better: use every man"  
"after his desert, and who should 'scape whipping?"  
"Use them after your own honour and dignity: the less"  
"they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty."  
"Take them in."  
"Come, sirs."  
"Follow him, friends: we'll hear a play to-morrow."  
"Exit POLONIUS with all the Players but the First"  
"Dost thou hear me, old friend, can you play the"  
"Murder of Gonzago?"  
"Ay, my lord."  
"We'll ha't to-morrow night. You could, for a need,"  
"study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines, which"  
"I would set down and insert in't, could you not?"  
"Ay, my lord."  
"Very well. Follow that lord, and look you mock him"  
not.  
"Exit First Player"  
"My good friends, I'll leave you till night: you are"  
"welcome to Elsinore."  
"Good my lord!"  
"Ay, so, God be wi' ye,"  
"Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN"  
"Now I am alone."  
"O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!"  
"Is it not monstrous that this player here,"  
"But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,"  
"Could force his soul so to his own conceit"  
"That from her working all his visage wann'd,"  
"Tears in his eyes, distraction in's aspect,"  
"A broken voice, and his whole function suiting"  
"With forms to his conceit? and all for nothing!"  
"For Hecuba!"  
"What's Hecuba to him, or he to Hecuba,"  
"That he should weep for her? What would he do,"  
"Had he the motive and the cue for passion"  
"That I have? He would drown the stage with tears"  
"And cleave the general ear with horrid speech,"  
"Make mad the guilty and appal the free,"  
"Confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed"  
"The very faculties of eyes and ears. Yet I,"  
"A dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak,"  
"Like John-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause,"  
"And can say nothing, no, not for a king,"  
"Upon whose property and most dear life"  
"A damn'd defeat was made. Am I a coward?"  
"Who calls me villain? breaks my pate across?"  
"Plucks off my beard, and blows it in my face?"  
"Tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' the throat,"  
"As deep as to the lungs? who does me this?"  
Ha!  
"'Swounds, I should take it: for it cannot be"  
"But I am pigeon-liver'd and lack gall"  
"To make oppression bitter, or ere this"  
"I should have fatted all the region kites"  
"With this slave's offal: bloody, bawdy villain!"  
"Remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain!"  
"O, vengeance!"  
"Why, what an ass am I! This is most brave,"  
"That I, the son of a dear father murder'd,"  
"Prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell,"  
"Must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words,"  
"And fall a-cursing, like a very drab,"  
"A scullion!"  
"Fie upon't! foh! About, my brain! I have heard"  
"That guilty creatures sitting at a play"  
"Have by the very cunning of the scene"  
"Been struck so to the soul that presently"  
"They have proclaim'd their malefactions,"  
"For murder, though it have no tongue, will speak"  
"With most miraculous organ. I'll have these players"  
"Play something like the murder of my father"  
"Before mine uncle: I'll observe his looks,"  
"I'll tent him to the quick: if he but blench,"  
"I know my course. The spirit that I have seen"  
"May be the devil: and the devil hath power"  
"To assume a pleasing shape, yea, and perhaps"  
"Out of my weakness and my melancholy,"  
"As he is very potent with such spirits,"  
"Abuses me to damn me: I'll have grounds"  
"More relative than this: the play 's the thing"  
"Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the king."  
  
  
"ACT III"  
"SCENE I. A room in the castle."  
"Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, POLONIUS, OPHELIA, ROSENCRANTZ, and GUILDENSTERN"  
"And can you, by no drift of circumstance,"  
"Get from him why he puts on this confusion,"  
"Grating so harshly all his days of quiet"  
"With turbulent and dangerous lunacy?"  
"He does confess he feels himself distracted,"  
"But from what cause he will by no means speak."  
"Nor do we find him forward to be sounded,"  
"But, with a crafty madness, keeps aloof,"  
"When we would bring him on to some confession"  
"Of his true state."  
"Did he receive you well?"  
"Most like a gentleman."  
"But with much forcing of his disposition."  
"Niggard of question, but, of our demands,"  
"Most free in his reply."  
"Did you assay him?"  
"To any pastime?"  
"Madam, it so fell out, that certain players"  
"We o'er-raught on the way: of these we told him,"  
"And there did seem in him a kind of joy"  
"To hear of it: they are about the court,"  
"And, as I think, they have already order"  
"This night to play before him."  
"'Tis most true:"  
"And he beseech'd me to entreat your majesties"  
"To hear and see the matter."  
"With all my heart, and it doth much content me"  
"To hear him so inclined."  
"Good gentlemen, give him a further edge,"  
"And drive his purpose on to these delights."  
"We shall, my lord."  
"Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN"  
"Sweet Gertrude, leave us too,"  
"For we have closely sent for Hamlet hither,"  
"That he, as 'twere by accident, may here"  
"Affront Ophelia:"  
"Her father and myself, lawful espials,"  
"Will so bestow ourselves that, seeing, unseen,"  
"We may of their encounter frankly judge,"  
"And gather by him, as he is behaved,"  
"If 't be the affliction of his love or no"  
"That thus he suffers for."  
"I shall obey you."  
"And for your part, Ophelia, I do wish"  
"That your good beauties be the happy cause"  
"Of Hamlet's wildness: so shall I hope your virtues"  
"Will bring him to his wonted way again,"  
"To both your honours."  
"Madam, I wish it may."  
"Exit QUEEN GERTRUDE"  
"Ophelia, walk you here. Gracious, so please you,"  
"We will bestow ourselves."  
"To OPHELIA"  
"Read on this book,"  
"That show of such an exercise may colour"  
"Your loneliness. We are oft to blame in this,--"  
"'Tis too much proved--that with devotion's visage"  
"And pious action we do sugar o'er"  
"The devil himself."  
"[Aside]          O, 'tis too true!"  
"How smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience!"  
"The harlot's cheek, beautied with plastering art,"  
"Is not more ugly to the thing that helps it"  
"Than is my deed to my most painted word:"  
"O heavy burthen!"  
"I hear him coming: let's withdraw, my lord."  
"Exeunt KING CLAUDIUS and POLONIUS"  
"Enter HAMLET"  
"To be, or not to be: that is the question:"  
"Whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer"  
"The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,"  
"Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,"  
"And by opposing end them? To die: to sleep,"  
"No more, and by a sleep to say we end"  
"The heart-ache and the thousand natural shocks"  
"That flesh is heir to, 'tis a consummation"  
"Devoutly to be wish'd. To die, to sleep,"  
"To sleep: perchance to dream: ay, there's the rub,"  
"For in that sleep of death what dreams may come"  
"When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,"  
"Must give us pause: there's the respect"  
"That makes calamity of so long life,"  
"For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,"  
"The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,"  
"The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,"  
"The insolence of office and the spurns"  
"That patient merit of the unworthy takes,"  
"When he himself might his quietus make"  
"With a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear,"  
"To grunt and sweat under a weary life,"  
"But that the dread of something after death,"  
"The undiscover'd country from whose bourn"  
"No traveller returns, puzzles the will"  
"And makes us rather bear those ills we have"  
"Than fly to others that we know not of?"  
"Thus conscience does make cowards of us all,"  
"And thus the native hue of resolution"  
"Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,"  
"And enterprises of great pith and moment"  
"With this regard their currents turn awry,"  
"And lose the name of action.--Soft you now!"  
"The fair Ophelia! Nymph, in thy orisons"  
"Be all my sins remember'd."  
"Good my lord,"  
"How does your honour for this many a day?"  
"I humbly thank you, well, well, well."  
"My lord, I have remembrances of yours,"  
"That I have longed long to re-deliver,"  
"I pray you, now receive them."  
"No, not I,"  
"I never gave you aught."  
"My honour'd lord, you know right well you did,"  
"And, with them, words of so sweet breath composed"  
"As made the things more rich: their perfume lost,"  
"Take these again, for to the noble mind"  
"Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind."  
"There, my lord."  
"Ha, ha! are you honest?"  
"My lord?"  
"Are you fair?"  
"What means your lordship?"  
"That if you be honest and fair, your honesty should"  
"admit no discourse to your beauty."  
"Could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than"  
"with honesty?"  
"Ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner"  
"transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the"  
"force of honesty can translate beauty into his"  
"likeness: this was sometime a paradox, but now the"  
"time gives it proof. I did love you once."  
"Indeed, my lord, you made me believe so."  
"You should not have believed me, for virtue cannot"  
"so inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of"  
"it: I loved you not."  
"I was the more deceived."  
"Get thee to a nunnery: why wouldst thou be a"  
"breeder of sinners? I am myself indifferent honest,"  
"but yet I could accuse me of such things that it"  
"were better my mother had not borne me: I am very"  
"proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at"  
"my beck than I have thoughts to put them in,"  
"imagination to give them shape, or time to act them"  
"in. What should such fellows as I do crawling"  
"between earth and heaven? We are arrant knaves,"  
"all, believe none of us. Go thy ways to a nunnery."  
"Where's your father?"  
"At home, my lord."  
"Let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the"  
"fool no where but in's own house. Farewell."  
"O, help him, you sweet heavens!"  
"If thou dost marry, I'll give thee this plague for"  
"thy dowry: be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as"  
"snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. Get thee to a"  
"nunnery, go: farewell. Or, if thou wilt needs"  
"marry, marry a fool, for wise men know well enough"  
"what monsters you make of them. To a nunnery, go,"  
"and quickly too. Farewell."  
"O heavenly powers, restore him!"  
"I have heard of your paintings too, well enough, God"  
"has given you one face, and you make yourselves"  
"another: you jig, you amble, and you lisp, and"  
"nick-name God's creatures, and make your wantonness"  
"your ignorance. Go to, I'll no more on't, it hath"  
"made me mad. I say, we will have no more marriages:"  
"those that are married already, all but one, shall"  
"live, the rest shall keep as they are. To a"  
"nunnery, go."  
Exit  
"O, what a noble mind is here o'erthrown!"  
"The courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue, sword,"  
"The expectancy and rose of the fair state,"  
"The glass of fashion and the mould of form,"  
"The observed of all observers, quite, quite down!"  
"And I, of ladies most deject and wretched,"  
"That suck'd the honey of his music vows,"  
"Now see that noble and most sovereign reason,"  
"Like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh,"  
"That unmatch'd form and feature of blown youth"  
"Blasted with ecstasy: O, woe is me,"  
"To have seen what I have seen, see what I see!"  
"Re-enter KING CLAUDIUS and POLONIUS"  
"Love! his affections do not that way tend,"  
"Nor what he spake, though it lack'd form a little,"  
"Was not like madness. There's something in his soul,"  
"O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,"  
"And I do doubt the hatch and the disclose"  
"Will be some danger: which for to prevent,"  
"I have in quick determination"  
"Thus set it down: he shall with speed to England,"  
"For the demand of our neglected tribute"  
"Haply the seas and countries different"  
"With variable objects shall expel"  
"This something-settled matter in his heart,"  
"Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus"  
"From fashion of himself. What think you on't?"  
"It shall do well: but yet do I believe"  
"The origin and commencement of his grief"  
"Sprung from neglected love. How now, Ophelia!"  
"You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said,"  
"We heard it all. My lord, do as you please,"  
"But, if you hold it fit, after the play"  
"Let his queen mother all alone entreat him"  
"To show his grief: let her be round with him,"  
"And I'll be placed, so please you, in the ear"  
"Of all their conference. If she find him not,"  
"To England send him, or confine him where"  
"Your wisdom best shall think."  
"It shall be so:"  
"Madness in great ones must not unwatch'd go."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. A hall in the castle."  
"Enter HAMLET and Players"  
"Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to"  
"you, trippingly on the tongue: but if you mouth it,"  
"as many of your players do, I had as lief the"  
"town-crier spoke my lines. Nor do not saw the air"  
"too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently,"  
"for in the very torrent, tempest, and, as I may say,"  
"the whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget"  
"a temperance that may give it smoothness. O, it"  
"offends me to the soul to hear a robustious"  
"periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to"  
"very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who"  
"for the most part are capable of nothing but"  
"inexplicable dumbshows and noise: I would have such"  
"a fellow whipped for o'erdoing Termagant, it"  
"out-herods Herod: pray you, avoid it."  
"I warrant your honour."  
"Be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion"  
"be your tutor: suit the action to the word, the"  
"word to the action, with this special o'erstep not"  
"the modesty of nature: for any thing so overdone is"  
"from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the"  
"first and now, was and is, to hold, as 'twere, the"  
"mirror up to nature, to show virtue her own feature,"  
"scorn her own image, and the very age and body of"  
"the time his form and pressure. Now this overdone,"  
"or come tardy off, though it make the unskilful"  
"laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve, the"  
"censure of the which one must in your allowance"  
"o'erweigh a whole theatre of others. O, there be"  
"players that I have seen play, and heard others"  
"praise, and that highly, not to speak it profanely,"  
"that, neither having the accent of Christians nor"  
"the gait of Christian, pagan, nor man, have so"  
"strutted and bellowed that I have thought some of"  
"nature's journeymen had made men and not made them"  
"well, they imitated humanity so abominably."  
"I hope we have reformed that indifferently with us,"  
sir.  
"O, reform it altogether. And let those that play"  
"your clowns speak no more than is set down for them,"  
"for there be of them that will themselves laugh, to"  
"set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh"  
"too, though, in the mean time, some necessary"  
"question of the play be then to be considered:"  
"that's villanous, and shows a most pitiful ambition"  
"in the fool that uses it. Go, make you ready."  
"Exeunt Players"  
"Enter POLONIUS, ROSENCRANTZ, and GUILDENSTERN"  
"How now, my lord! I will the king hear this piece of work?"  
"And the queen too, and that presently."  
"Bid the players make haste."  
"Exit POLONIUS"  
"Will you two help to hasten them?"  
"We will, my lord."  
"Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN"  
"What ho! Horatio!"  
"Enter HORATIO"  
"Here, sweet lord, at your service."  
"Horatio, thou art e'en as just a man"  
"As e'er my conversation coped withal."  
"O, my dear lord,--"  
"Nay, do not think I flatter,"  
"For what advancement may I hope from thee"  
"That no revenue hast but thy good spirits,"  
"To feed and clothe thee? Why should the poor be flatter'd?"  
"No, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp,"  
"And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee"  
"Where thrift may follow fawning. Dost thou hear?"  
"Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice"  
"And could of men distinguish, her election"  
"Hath seal'd thee for herself, for thou hast been"  
"As one, in suffering all, that suffers nothing,"  
"A man that fortune's buffets and rewards"  
"Hast ta'en with equal thanks: and blest are those"  
"Whose blood and judgment are so well commingled,"  
"That they are not a pipe for fortune's finger"  
"To sound what stop she please. Give me that man"  
"That is not passion's slave, and I will wear him"  
"In my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart,"  
"As I do thee.--Something too much of this.--"  
"There is a play to-night before the king,"  
"One scene of it comes near the circumstance"  
"Which I have told thee of my father's death:"  
"I prithee, when thou seest that act afoot,"  
"Even with the very comment of thy soul"  
"Observe mine uncle: if his occulted guilt"  
"Do not itself unkennel in one speech,"  
"It is a damned ghost that we have seen,"  
"And my imaginations are as foul"  
"As Vulcan's stithy. Give him heedful note,"  
"For I mine eyes will rivet to his face,"  
"And after we will both our judgments join"  
"In censure of his seeming."  
"Well, my lord:"  
"If he steal aught the whilst this play is playing,"  
"And 'scape detecting, I will pay the theft."  
"They are coming to the play, I must be idle:"  
"Get you a place."  
"Danish march. A flourish. Enter KING CLAUDIUS,  QUEEN GERTRUDE, POLONIUS, OPHELIA, ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, and others"  
"How fares our cousin Hamlet?"  
"Excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish: I eat"  
"the air, promise-crammed: you cannot feed capons so."  
"I have nothing with this answer, Hamlet, these words"  
"are not mine."  
"No, nor mine now."  
"To POLONIUS"  
"My lord, you played once i' the university, you say?"  
"That did I, my lord, and was accounted a good actor."  
"What did you enact?"  
"I did enact Julius Caesar: I was killed i' the"  
"Capitol, Brutus killed me."  
"It was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf"  
"there. Be the players ready?"  
"Ay, my lord, they stay upon your patience."  
"Come hither, my dear Hamlet, sit by me."  
"No, good mother, here's metal more attractive."  
"[To KING CLAUDIUS]  O, ho! do you mark that?"  
"Lady, shall I lie in your lap?"  
"Lying down at OPHELIA's feet"  
"No, my lord."  
"I mean, my head upon your lap?"  
"Ay, my lord."  
"Do you think I meant country matters?"  
"I think nothing, my lord."  
"That's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs."  
"What is, my lord?"  
Nothing.  
"You are merry, my lord."  
"Who, I?"  
"Ay, my lord."  
"O God, your only jig-maker. What should a man do"  
"but be merry? for, look you, how cheerfully my"  
"mother looks, and my father died within these two hours."  
"Nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord."  
"So long? Nay then, let the devil wear black, for"  
"I'll have a suit of sables. O heavens! die two"  
"months ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's"  
"hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half"  
"a year: but, by'r lady, he must build churches,"  
"then, or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with"  
"the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is 'For, O, for, O,"  
"the hobby-horse is forgot.'"  
"Hautboys play. The dumb-show enters"  
"Enter a King and a Queen very lovingly, the Queen  embracing him, and he her. She kneels, and makes  show of protestation unto him. He takes her up,  and declines his head upon her neck: lays him down  upon a bank of flowers: she, seeing him asleep,  leaves him. Anon comes in a fellow, takes off his  crown, kisses it, and pours poison in the King's  ears, and exit. The Queen returns, finds the King  dead, and makes passionate action. The Poisoner,  with some two or three Mutes, comes in again,  seeming to lament with her. The dead body is  carried away. The Poisoner wooes the Queen with  gifts: she seems loath and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts his love"  
Exeunt  
"What means this, my lord?"  
"Marry, this is miching mallecho, it means mischief."  
"Belike this show imports the argument of the play."  
"Enter Prologue"  
"We shall know by this fellow: the players cannot"  
"keep counsel, they'll tell all."  
"Will he tell us what this show meant?"  
"Ay, or any show that you'll show him: be not you"  
"ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means."  
"You are naught, you are naught: I'll mark the play."  
"For us, and for our tragedy,"  
"Here stooping to your clemency,"  
"We beg your hearing patiently."  
Exit  
"Is this a prologue, or the posy of a ring?"  
"'Tis brief, my lord."  
"As woman's love."  
"Enter two Players, King and Queen"  
"Full thirty times hath Phoebus' cart gone round"  
"Neptune's salt wash and Tellus' orbed ground,"  
"And thirty dozen moons with borrow'd sheen"  
"About the world have times twelve thirties been,"  
"Since love our hearts and Hymen did our hands"  
"Unite commutual in most sacred bands."  
"So many journeys may the sun and moon"  
"Make us again count o'er ere love be done!"  
"But, woe is me, you are so sick of late,"  
"So far from cheer and from your former state,"  
"That I distrust you. Yet, though I distrust,"  
"Discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must:"  
"For women's fear and love holds quantity,"  
"In neither aught, or in extremity."  
"Now, what my love is, proof hath made you know,"  
"And as my love is sized, my fear is so:"  
"Where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear,"  
"Where little fears grow great, great love grows there."  
"'Faith, I must leave thee, love, and shortly too,"  
"My operant powers their functions leave to do:"  
"And thou shalt live in this fair world behind,"  
"Honour'd, beloved, and haply one as kind"  
"For husband shalt thou--"  
"O, confound the rest!"  
"Such love must needs be treason in my breast:"  
"In second husband let me be accurst!"  
"None wed the second but who kill'd the first."  
"[Aside]  Wormwood, wormwood."  
"The instances that second marriage move"  
"Are base respects of thrift, but none of love:"  
"A second time I kill my husband dead,"  
"When second husband kisses me in bed."  
"I do believe you think what now you speak,"  
"But what we do determine oft we break."  
"Purpose is but the slave to memory,"  
"Of violent birth, but poor validity,"  
"Which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree,"  
"But fall, unshaken, when they mellow be."  
"Most necessary 'tis that we forget"  
"To pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt:"  
"What to ourselves in passion we propose,"  
"The passion ending, doth the purpose lose."  
"The violence of either grief or joy"  
"Their own enactures with themselves destroy:"  
"Where joy most revels, grief doth most lament,"  
"Grief joys, joy grieves, on slender accident."  
"This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange"  
"That even our loves should with our fortunes change,"  
"For 'tis a question left us yet to prove,"  
"Whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love."  
"The great man down, you mark his favourite flies,"  
"The poor advanced makes friends of enemies."  
"And hitherto doth love on fortune tend,"  
"For who not needs shall never lack a friend,"  
"And who in want a hollow friend doth try,"  
"Directly seasons him his enemy."  
"But, orderly to end where I begun,"  
"Our wills and fates do so contrary run"  
"That our devices still are overthrown,"  
"Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own:"  
"So think thou wilt no second husband wed,"  
"But die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead."  
"Nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light!"  
"Sport and repose lock from me day and night!"  
"To desperation turn my trust and hope!"  
"An anchor's cheer in prison be my scope!"  
"Each opposite that blanks the face of joy"  
"Meet what I would have well and it destroy!"  
"Both here and hence pursue me lasting strife,"  
"If, once a widow, ever I be wife!"  
"If she should break it now!"  
"'Tis deeply sworn. Sweet, leave me here awhile,"  
"My spirits grow dull, and fain I would beguile"  
"The tedious day with sleep."  
Sleeps  
"Sleep rock thy brain,"  
"And never come mischance between us twain!"  
Exit  
"Madam, how like you this play?"  
"The lady protests too much, methinks."  
"O, but she'll keep her word."  
"Have you heard the argument? Is there no offence in 't?"  
"No, no, they do but jest, poison in jest, no offence"  
"i' the world."  
"What do you call the play?"  
"The Mouse-trap. Marry, how? Tropically. This play"  
"is the image of a murder done in Vienna: Gonzago is"  
"the duke's name, his wife, Baptista: you shall see"  
"anon, 'tis a knavish piece of work: but what o'"  
"that? your majesty and we that have free souls, it"  
"touches us not: let the galled jade wince, our"  
"withers are unwrung."  
"Enter LUCIANUS"  
"This is one Lucianus, nephew to the king."  
"You are as good as a chorus, my lord."  
"I could interpret between you and your love, if I"  
"could see the puppets dallying."  
"You are keen, my lord, you are keen."  
"It would cost you a groaning to take off my edge."  
"Still better, and worse."  
"So you must take your husbands. Begin, murderer,"  
"pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin. Come:"  
"'the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge.'"  
"Thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing,"  
"Confederate season, else no creature seeing,"  
"Thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected,"  
"With Hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected,"  
"Thy natural magic and dire property,"  
"On wholesome life usurp immediately."  
"Pours the poison into the sleeper's ears"  
"He poisons him i' the garden for's estate. His"  
"name's Gonzago: the story is extant, and writ in"  
"choice Italian: you shall see anon how the murderer"  
"gets the love of Gonzago's wife."  
"The king rises."  
"What, frighted with false fire!"  
"How fares my lord?"  
"Give o'er the play."  
"Give me some light: away!"  
"Lights, lights, lights!"  
"Exeunt all but HAMLET and HORATIO"  
"Why, let the stricken deer go weep,"  
"The hart ungalled play,"  
"For some must watch, while some must sleep:"  
"So runs the world away."  
"Would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers-- if"  
"the rest of my fortunes turn Turk with me--with two"  
"Provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a"  
"fellowship in a cry of players, sir?"  
"Half a share."  
"A whole one, I."  
"For thou dost know, O Damon dear,"  
"This realm dismantled was"  
"Of Jove himself, and now reigns here"  
"A very, very--pajock."  
"You might have rhymed."  
"O good Horatio, I'll take the ghost's word for a"  
"thousand pound. Didst perceive?"  
"Very well, my lord."  
"Upon the talk of the poisoning?"  
"I did very well note him."  
"Ah, ha! Come, some music! come, the recorders!"  
"For if the king like not the comedy,"  
"Why then, belike, he likes it not, perdy."  
"Come, some music!"  
"Re-enter ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN"  
"Good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you."  
"Sir, a whole history."  
"The king, sir,--"  
"Ay, sir, what of him?"  
"Is in his retirement marvellous distempered."  
"With drink, sir?"  
"No, my lord, rather with choler."  
"Your wisdom should show itself more richer to"  
"signify this to his doctor, for, for me to put him"  
"to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far"  
"more choler."  
"Good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and"  
"start not so wildly from my affair."  
"I am tame, sir: pronounce."  
"The queen, your mother, in most great affliction of"  
"spirit, hath sent me to you."  
"You are welcome."  
"Nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right"  
"breed. If it shall please you to make me a"  
"wholesome answer, I will do your mother's"  
"commandment: if not, your pardon and my return"  
"shall be the end of my business."  
"Sir, I cannot."  
"What, my lord?"  
"Make you a wholesome answer, my wit's diseased: but,"  
"sir, such answer as I can make, you shall command,"  
"or, rather, as you say, my mother: therefore no"  
"more, but to the matter: my mother, you say,--"  
"Then thus she says, your behavior hath struck her"  
"into amazement and admiration."  
"O wonderful son, that can so astonish a mother! But"  
"is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's"  
"admiration? Impart."  
"She desires to speak with you in her closet, ere you"  
"go to bed."  
"We shall obey, were she ten times our mother. Have"  
"you any further trade with us?"  
"My lord, you once did love me."  
"So I do still, by these pickers and stealers."  
"Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you"  
"do, surely, bar the door upon your own liberty, if"  
"you deny your griefs to your friend."  
"Sir, I lack advancement."  
"How can that be, when you have the voice of the king"  
"himself for your succession in Denmark?"  
"Ay, but sir, 'While the grass grows,'--the proverb"  
"is something musty."  
"Re-enter Players with recorders"  
"O, the recorders! let me see one. To withdraw with"  
"you:--why do you go about to recover the wind of me,"  
"as if you would drive me into a toil?"  
"O, my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too"  
unmannerly.  
"I do not well understand that. Will you play upon"  
"this pipe?"  
"My lord, I cannot."  
"I pray you."  
"Believe me, I cannot."  
"I do beseech you."  
"I know no touch of it, my lord."  
"'Tis as easy as lying: govern these ventages with"  
"your lingers and thumb, give it breath with your"  
"mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music."  
"Look you, these are the stops."  
"But these cannot I command to any utterance of"  
"harmony, I have not the skill."  
"Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of"  
"me! You would play upon me, you would seem to know"  
"my stops, you would pluck out the heart of my"  
"mystery, you would sound me from my lowest note to"  
"the top of my compass: and there is much music,"  
"excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot"  
"you make it speak. 'Sblood, do you think I am"  
"easier to be played on than a pipe? Call me what"  
"instrument you will, though you can fret me, yet you"  
"cannot play upon me."  
"Enter POLONIUS"  
"God bless you, sir!"  
"My lord, the queen would speak with you, and"  
presently.  
"Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?"  
"By the mass, and 'tis like a camel, indeed."  
"Methinks it is like a weasel."  
"It is backed like a weasel."  
"Or like a whale?"  
"Very like a whale."  
"Then I will come to my mother by and by. They fool"  
"me to the top of my bent. I will come by and by."  
"I will say so."  
"By and by is easily said."  
"Exit POLONIUS"  
"Leave me, friends."  
"Exeunt all but HAMLET"  
"Tis now the very witching time of night,"  
"When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes out"  
"Contagion to this world: now could I drink hot blood,"  
"And do such bitter business as the day"  
"Would quake to look on. Soft! now to my mother."  
"O heart, lose not thy nature, let not ever"  
"The soul of Nero enter this firm bosom:"  
"Let me be cruel, not unnatural:"  
"I will speak daggers to her, but use none,"  
"My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites,"  
"How in my words soever she be shent,"  
"To give them seals never, my soul, consent!"  
Exit  
"SCENE III. A room in the castle."  
"Enter KING CLAUDIUS, ROSENCRANTZ, and GUILDENSTERN"  
"I like him not, nor stands it safe with us"  
"To let his madness range. Therefore prepare you,"  
"I your commission will forthwith dispatch,"  
"And he to England shall along with you:"  
"The terms of our estate may not endure"  
"Hazard so dangerous as doth hourly grow"  
"Out of his lunacies."  
"We will ourselves provide:"  
"Most holy and religious fear it is"  
"To keep those many many bodies safe"  
"That live and feed upon your majesty."  
"The single and peculiar life is bound,"  
"With all the strength and armour of the mind,"  
"To keep itself from noyance, but much more"  
"That spirit upon whose weal depend and rest"  
"The lives of many. The cease of majesty"  
"Dies not alone, but, like a gulf, doth draw"  
"What's near it with it: it is a massy wheel,"  
"Fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,"  
"To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things"  
"Are mortised and adjoin'd, which, when it falls,"  
"Each small annexment, petty consequence,"  
"Attends the boisterous ruin. Never alone"  
"Did the king sigh, but with a general groan."  
"Arm you, I pray you, to this speedy voyage,"  
"For we will fetters put upon this fear,"  
"Which now goes too free-footed."  
"We will haste us."  
"Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN"  
"Enter POLONIUS"  
"My lord, he's going to his mother's closet:"  
"Behind the arras I'll convey myself,"  
"To hear the process, and warrant she'll tax him home:"  
"And, as you said, and wisely was it said,"  
"'Tis meet that some more audience than a mother,"  
"Since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear"  
"The speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege:"  
"I'll call upon you ere you go to bed,"  
"And tell you what I know."  
"Thanks, dear my lord."  
"Exit POLONIUS"  
"O, my offence is rank it smells to heaven,"  
"It hath the primal eldest curse upon't,"  
"A brother's murder. Pray can I not,"  
"Though inclination be as sharp as will:"  
"My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,"  
"And, like a man to double business bound,"  
"I stand in pause where I shall first begin,"  
"And both neglect. What if this cursed hand"  
"Were thicker than itself with brother's blood,"  
"Is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens"  
"To wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy"  
"But to confront the visage of offence?"  
"And what's in prayer but this two-fold force,"  
"To be forestalled ere we come to fall,"  
"Or pardon'd being down? Then I'll look up,"  
"My fault is past. But, O, what form of prayer"  
"Can serve my turn? 'Forgive me my foul murder'?"  
"That cannot be, since I am still possess'd"  
"Of those effects for which I did the murder,"  
"My crown, mine own ambition and my queen."  
"May one be pardon'd and retain the offence?"  
"In the corrupted currents of this world"  
"Offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,"  
"And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself"  
"Buys out the law: but 'tis not so above,"  
"There is no shuffling, there the action lies"  
"In his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd,"  
"Even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,"  
"To give in evidence. What then? what rests?"  
"Try what repentance can: what can it not?"  
"Yet what can it when one can not repent?"  
"O wretched state! O bosom black as death!"  
"O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,"  
"Art more engaged! Help, angels! Make assay!"  
"Bow, stubborn knees, and, heart with strings of steel,"  
"Be soft as sinews of the newborn babe!"  
"All may be well."  
"Retires and kneels"  
"Enter HAMLET"  
"Now might I do it pat, now he is praying,"  
"And now I'll do't. And so he goes to heaven,"  
"And so am I revenged. That would be scann'd:"  
"A villain kills my father, and for that,"  
"I, his sole son, do this same villain send"  
"To heaven."  
"O, this is hire and salary, not revenge."  
"He took my father grossly, full of bread,"  
"With all his crimes broad blown, as flush as May,"  
"And how his audit stands who knows save heaven?"  
"But in our circumstance and course of thought,"  
"'Tis heavy with him: and am I then revenged,"  
"To take him in the purging of his soul,"  
"When he is fit and season'd for his passage?"  
No!  
"Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent:"  
"When he is drunk asleep, or in his rage,"  
"Or in the incestuous pleasure of his bed,"  
"At gaming, swearing, or about some act"  
"That has no relish of salvation in't,"  
"Then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,"  
"And that his soul may be as damn'd and black"  
"As hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays:"  
"This physic but prolongs thy sickly days."  
Exit  
"[Rising]  My words fly up, my thoughts remain below:"  
"Words without thoughts never to heaven go."  
Exit  
"SCENE IV. The Queen's closet."  
"Enter QUEEN GERTRUDE and POLONIUS"  
"He will come straight. Look you lay home to him:"  
"Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,"  
"And that your grace hath screen'd and stood between"  
"Much heat and him. I'll sconce me even here."  
"Pray you, be round with him."  
"[Within]  Mother, mother, mother!"  
"I'll warrant you,"  
"Fear me not: withdraw, I hear him coming."  
"POLONIUS hides behind the arras"  
"Enter HAMLET"  
"Now, mother, what's the matter?"  
"Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended."  
"Mother, you have my father much offended."  
"Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue."  
"Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue."  
"Why, how now, Hamlet!"  
"What's the matter now?"  
"Have you forgot me?"  
"No, by the rood, not so:"  
"You are the queen, your husband's brother's wife,"  
"And--would it were not so!--you are my mother."  
"Nay, then, I'll set those to you that can speak."  
"Come, come, and sit you down, you shall not budge,"  
"You go not till I set you up a glass"  
"Where you may see the inmost part of you."  
"What wilt thou do? thou wilt not murder me?"  
"Help, help, ho!"  
"[Behind]  What, ho! help, help, help!"  
"[Drawing]  How now! a rat? Dead, for a ducat, dead!"  
"Makes a pass through the arras"  
"[Behind]  O, I am slain!"  
"Falls and dies"  
"O me, what hast thou done?"  
"Nay, I know not:"  
"Is it the king?"  
"O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!"  
"A bloody deed! almost as bad, good mother,"  
"As kill a king, and marry with his brother."  
"As kill a king!"  
"Ay, lady, 'twas my word."  
"Lifts up the array and discovers POLONIUS"  
"Thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!"  
"I took thee for thy better: take thy fortune,"  
"Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger."  
"Leave wringing of your hands: peace! sit you down,"  
"And let me wring your heart, for so I shall,"  
"If it be made of penetrable stuff,"  
"If damned custom have not brass'd it so"  
"That it is proof and bulwark against sense."  
"What have I done, that thou darest wag thy tongue"  
"In noise so rude against me?"  
"Such an act"  
"That blurs the grace and blush of modesty,"  
"Calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose"  
"From the fair forehead of an innocent love"  
"And sets a blister there, makes marriage-vows"  
"As false as dicers' oaths: O, such a deed"  
"As from the body of contraction plucks"  
"The very soul, and sweet religion makes"  
"A rhapsody of words: heaven's face doth glow:"  
"Yea, this solidity and compound mass,"  
"With tristful visage, as against the doom,"  
"Is thought-sick at the act."  
"Ay me, what act,"  
"That roars so loud, and thunders in the index?"  
"Look here, upon this picture, and on this,"  
"The counterfeit presentment of two brothers."  
"See, what a grace was seated on this brow,"  
"Hyperion's curls, the front of Jove himself,"  
"An eye like Mars, to threaten and command,"  
"A station like the herald Mercury"  
"New-lighted on a heaven-kissing hill,"  
"A combination and a form indeed,"  
"Where every god did seem to set his seal,"  
"To give the world assurance of a man:"  
"This was your husband. Look you now, what follows:"  
"Here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear,"  
"Blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?"  
"Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,"  
"And batten on this moor? Ha! have you eyes?"  
"You cannot call it love, for at your age"  
"The hey-day in the blood is tame, it's humble,"  
"And waits upon the judgment: and what judgment"  
"Would step from this to this? Sense, sure, you have,"  
"Else could you not have motion, but sure, that sense"  
"Is apoplex'd, for madness would not err,"  
"Nor sense to ecstasy was ne'er so thrall'd"  
"But it reserved some quantity of choice,"  
"To serve in such a difference. What devil was't"  
"That thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?"  
"Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,"  
"Ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,"  
"Or but a sickly part of one true sense"  
"Could not so mope."  
"O shame! where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,"  
"If thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,"  
"To flaming youth let virtue be as wax,"  
"And melt in her own fire: proclaim no shame"  
"When the compulsive ardour gives the charge,"  
"Since frost itself as actively doth burn"  
"And reason panders will."  
"O Hamlet, speak no more:"  
"Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,"  
"And there I see such black and grained spots"  
"As will not leave their tinct."  
"Nay, but to live"  
"In the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,"  
"Stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love"  
"Over the nasty sty,--"  
"O, speak to me no more,"  
"These words, like daggers, enter in mine ears,"  
"No more, sweet Hamlet!"  
"A murderer and a villain,"  
"A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe"  
"Of your precedent lord, a vice of kings,"  
"A cutpurse of the empire and the rule,"  
"That from a shelf the precious diadem stole,"  
"And put it in his pocket!"  
"No more!"  
"A king of shreds and patches,--"  
"Enter Ghost"  
"Save me, and hover o'er me with your wings,"  
"You heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?"  
"Alas, he's mad!"  
"Do you not come your tardy son to chide,"  
"That, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by"  
"The important acting of your dread command? O, say!"  
"Do not forget: this visitation"  
"Is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose."  
"But, look, amazement on thy mother sits:"  
"O, step between her and her fighting soul:"  
"Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works:"  
"Speak to her, Hamlet."  
"How is it with you, lady?"  
"Alas, how is't with you,"  
"That you do bend your eye on vacancy"  
"And with the incorporal air do hold discourse?"  
"Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep,"  
"And, as the sleeping soldiers in the alarm,"  
"Your bedded hair, like life in excrements,"  
"Starts up, and stands on end. O gentle son,"  
"Upon the heat and flame of thy distemper"  
"Sprinkle cool patience. Whereon do you look?"  
"On him, on him! Look you, how pale he glares!"  
"His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,"  
"Would make them capable. Do not look upon me,"  
"Lest with this piteous action you convert"  
"My stern effects: then what I have to do"  
"Will want true colour, tears perchance for blood."  
"To whom do you speak this?"  
"Do you see nothing there?"  
"Nothing at all, yet all that is I see."  
"Nor did you nothing hear?"  
"No, nothing but ourselves."  
"Why, look you there! look, how it steals away!"  
"My father, in his habit as he lived!"  
"Look, where he goes, even now, out at the portal!"  
"Exit Ghost"  
"This the very coinage of your brain:"  
"This bodiless creation ecstasy"  
"Is very cunning in."  
Ecstasy!  
"My pulse, as yours, doth temperately keep time,"  
"And makes as healthful music: it is not madness"  
"That I have utter'd: bring me to the test,"  
"And I the matter will re-word, which madness"  
"Would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,"  
"Lay not that mattering unction to your soul,"  
"That not your trespass, but my madness speaks:"  
"It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,"  
"Whilst rank corruption, mining all within,"  
"Infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven,"  
"Repent what's past, avoid what is to come,"  
"And do not spread the compost on the weeds,"  
"To make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue,"  
"For in the fatness of these pursy times"  
"Virtue itself of vice must pardon beg,"  
"Yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good."  
"O Hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain."  
"O, throw away the worser part of it,"  
"And live the purer with the other half."  
"Good night: but go not to mine uncle's bed,"  
"Assume a virtue, if you have it not."  
"That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat,"  
"Of habits devil, is angel yet in this,"  
"That to the use of actions fair and good"  
"He likewise gives a frock or livery,"  
"That aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,"  
"And that shall lend a kind of easiness"  
"To the next abstinence: the next more easy,"  
"For use almost can change the stamp of nature,"  
"And either [         ] the devil, or throw him out"  
"With wondrous potency. Once more, good night:"  
"And when you are desirous to be bless'd,"  
"I'll blessing beg of you. For this same lord,"  
"Pointing to POLONIUS"  
"I do repent: but heaven hath pleased it so,"  
"To punish me with this and this with me,"  
"That I must be their scourge and minister."  
"I will bestow him, and will answer well"  
"The death I gave him. So, again, good night."  
"I must be cruel, only to be kind:"  
"Thus bad begins and worse remains behind."  
"One word more, good lady."  
"What shall I do?"  
"Not this, by no means, that I bid you do:"  
"Let the bloat king tempt you again to bed,"  
"Pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse,"  
"And let him, for a pair of reechy kisses,"  
"Or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers,"  
"Make you to ravel all this matter out,"  
"That I essentially am not in madness,"  
"But mad in craft. 'Twere good you let him know,"  
"For who, that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise,"  
"Would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib,"  
"Such dear concernings hide? who would do so?"  
"No, in despite of sense and secrecy,"  
"Unpeg the basket on the house's top."  
"Let the birds fly, and, like the famous ape,"  
"To try conclusions, in the basket creep,"  
"And break your own neck down."  
"Be thou assured, if words be made of breath,"  
"And breath of life, I have no life to breathe"  
"What thou hast said to me."  
"I must to England, you know that?"  
Alack,  
"I had forgot: 'tis so concluded on."  
"There's letters seal'd: and my two schoolfellows,"  
"Whom I will trust as I will adders fang'd,"  
"They bear the mandate, they must sweep my way,"  
"And marshal me to knavery. Let it work,"  
"For 'tis the sport to have the engineer"  
"Hoist with his own petard: and 't shall go hard"  
"But I will delve one yard below their mines,"  
"And blow them at the moon: O, 'tis most sweet,"  
"When in one line two crafts directly meet."  
"This man shall set me packing:"  
"I'll lug the guts into the neighbour room."  
"Mother, good night. Indeed this counsellor"  
"Is now most still, most secret and most grave,"  
"Who was in life a foolish prating knave."  
"Come, sir, to draw toward an end with you."  
"Good night, mother."  
"Exeunt severally, HAMLET dragging in POLONIUS"  
"ACT IV"  
"SCENE I. A room in the castle."  
"Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, ROSENCRANTZ, and GUILDENSTERN"  
"There's matter in these sighs, these profound heaves:"  
"You must translate: 'tis fit we understand them."  
"Where is your son?"  
"Bestow this place on us a little while."  
"Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN"  
"Ah, my good lord, what have I seen to-night!"  
"What, Gertrude? How does Hamlet?"  
"Mad as the sea and wind, when both contend"  
"Which is the mightier: in his lawless fit,"  
"Behind the arras hearing something stir,"  
"Whips out his rapier, cries, 'A rat, a rat!'"  
"And, in this brainish apprehension, kills"  
"The unseen good old man."  
"O heavy deed!"  
"It had been so with us, had we been there:"  
"His liberty is full of threats to all,"  
"To you yourself, to us, to every one."  
"Alas, how shall this bloody deed be answer'd?"  
"It will be laid to us, whose providence"  
"Should have kept short, restrain'd and out of haunt,"  
"This mad young man: but so much was our love,"  
"We would not understand what was most fit,"  
"But, like the owner of a foul disease,"  
"To keep it from divulging, let it feed"  
"Even on the pith of Life. Where is he gone?"  
"To draw apart the body he hath kill'd:"  
"O'er whom his very madness, like some ore"  
"Among a mineral of metals base,"  
"Shows itself pure, he weeps for what is done."  
"O Gertrude, come away!"  
"The sun no sooner shall the mountains touch,"  
"But we will ship him hence: and this vile deed"  
"We must, with all our majesty and skill,"  
"Both countenance and excuse. Ho, Guildenstern!"  
"Re-enter ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN"  
"Friends both, go join you with some further aid:"  
"Hamlet in madness hath Polonius slain,"  
"And from his mother's closet hath he dragg'd him:"  
"Go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body"  
"Into the chapel. I pray you, haste in this."  
"Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN"  
"Come, Gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends,"  
"And let them know, both what we mean to do,"  
"And what's untimely done. O, come away!"  
"My soul is full of discord and dismay."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. Another room in the castle."  
"Enter HAMLET"  
"Safely stowed."  
ROSENCRANTZ:  
GUILDENSTERN:  
"[Within]  Hamlet! Lord Hamlet!"  
"What noise? who calls on Hamlet?"  
"O, here they come."  
"Enter ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN"  
"What have you done, my lord, with the dead body?"  
"Compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin."  
"Tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence"  
"And bear it to the chapel."  
"Do not believe it."  
"Believe what?"  
"That I can keep your counsel and not mine own."  
"Besides, to be demanded of a sponge! what"  
"replication should be made by the son of a king?"  
"Take you me for a sponge, my lord?"  
"Ay, sir, that soaks up the king's countenance, his"  
"rewards, his authorities. But such officers do the"  
"king best service in the end: he keeps them, like"  
"an ape, in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed, to"  
"be last swallowed: when he needs what you have"  
"gleaned, it is but squeezing you, and, sponge, you"  
"shall be dry again."  
"I understand you not, my lord."  
"I am glad of it: a knavish speech sleeps in a"  
"foolish ear."  
"My lord, you must tell us where the body is, and go"  
"with us to the king."  
"The body is with the king, but the king is not with"  
"the body. The king is a thing--"  
"A thing, my lord!"  
"Of nothing: bring me to him. Hide fox, and all after."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE III. Another room in the castle."  
"Enter KING CLAUDIUS, attended"  
"I have sent to seek him, and to find the body."  
"How dangerous is it that this man goes loose!"  
"Yet must not we put the strong law on him:"  
"He's loved of the distracted multitude,"  
"Who like not in their judgment, but their eyes,"  
"And where tis so, the offender's scourge is weigh'd,"  
"But never the offence. To bear all smooth and even,"  
"This sudden sending him away must seem"  
"Deliberate pause: diseases desperate grown"  
"By desperate appliance are relieved,"  
"Or not at all."  
"Enter ROSENCRANTZ"  
"How now! what hath befall'n?"  
"Where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord,"  
"We cannot get from him."  
"But where is he?"  
"Without, my lord, guarded, to know your pleasure."  
"Bring him before us."  
"Ho, Guildenstern! bring in my lord."  
"Enter HAMLET and GUILDENSTERN"  
"Now, Hamlet, where's Polonius?"  
"At supper."  
"At supper! where?"  
"Not where he eats, but where he is eaten: a certain"  
"convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. Your"  
"worm is your only emperor for diet: we fat all"  
"creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for"  
"maggots: your fat king and your lean beggar is but"  
"variable service, two dishes, but to one table:"  
"that's the end."  
"Alas, alas!"  
"A man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a"  
"king, and cat of the fish that hath fed of that worm."  
"What dost you mean by this?"  
"Nothing but to show you how a king may go a"  
"progress through the guts of a beggar."  
"Where is Polonius?"  
"In heaven, send hither to see: if your messenger"  
"find him not there, seek him i' the other place"  
"yourself. But indeed, if you find him not within"  
"this month, you shall nose him as you go up the"  
"stairs into the lobby."  
"Go seek him there."  
"To some Attendants"  
"He will stay till ye come."  
"Exeunt Attendants"  
"Hamlet, this deed, for thine especial safety,--"  
"Which we do tender, as we dearly grieve"  
"For that which thou hast done,--must send thee hence"  
"With fiery quickness: therefore prepare thyself,"  
"The bark is ready, and the wind at help,"  
"The associates tend, and every thing is bent"  
"For England."  
"For England!"  
"Ay, Hamlet."  
Good.  
"So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes."  
"I see a cherub that sees them. But, come, for"  
"England! Farewell, dear mother."  
"Thy loving father, Hamlet."  
"My mother: father and mother is man and wife, man"  
"and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother. Come, for England!"  
Exit  
"Follow him at foot, tempt him with speed aboard,"  
"Delay it not, I'll have him hence to-night:"  
"Away! for every thing is seal'd and done"  
"That else leans on the affair: pray you, make haste."  
"Exeunt ROSENCRANTZ and GUILDENSTERN"  
"And, England, if my love thou hold'st at aught--"  
"As my great power thereof may give thee sense,"  
"Since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red"  
"After the Danish sword, and thy free awe"  
"Pays homage to us--thou mayst not coldly set"  
"Our sovereign process, which imports at full,"  
"By letters congruing to that effect,"  
"The present death of Hamlet. Do it, England,"  
"For like the hectic in my blood he rages,"  
"And thou must cure me: till I know 'tis done,"  
"Howe'er my haps, my joys were ne'er begun."  
Exit  
"SCENE IV. A plain in Denmark."  
"Enter FORTINBRAS, a Captain, and Soldiers, marching"  
"Go, captain, from me greet the Danish king,"  
"Tell him that, by his licence, Fortinbras"  
"Craves the conveyance of a promised march"  
"Over his kingdom. You know the rendezvous."  
"If that his majesty would aught with us,"  
"We shall express our duty in his eye,"  
"And let him know so."  
"I will do't, my lord."  
"Go softly on."  
"Exeunt FORTINBRAS and Soldiers"  
"Enter HAMLET, ROSENCRANTZ, GUILDENSTERN, and others"  
"Good sir, whose powers are these?"  
"They are of Norway, sir."  
"How purposed, sir, I pray you?"  
"Against some part of Poland."  
"Who commands them, sir?"  
"The nephews to old Norway, Fortinbras."  
"Goes it against the main of Poland, sir,"  
"Or for some frontier?"  
"Truly to speak, and with no addition,"  
"We go to gain a little patch of ground"  
"That hath in it no profit but the name."  
"To pay five ducats, five, I would not farm it,"  
"Nor will it yield to Norway or the Pole"  
"A ranker rate, should it be sold in fee."  
"Why, then the Polack never will defend it."  
"Yes, it is already garrison'd."  
"Two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats"  
"Will not debate the question of this straw:"  
"This is the imposthume of much wealth and peace,"  
"That inward breaks, and shows no cause without"  
"Why the man dies. I humbly thank you, sir."  
"God be wi' you, sir."  
Exit  
"Wilt please you go, my lord?"  
"I'll be with you straight go a little before."  
"Exeunt all except HAMLET"  
"How all occasions do inform against me,"  
"And spur my dull revenge! What is a man,"  
"If his chief good and market of his time"  
"Be but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more."  
"Sure, he that made us with such large discourse,"  
"Looking before and after, gave us not"  
"That capability and god-like reason"  
"To fust in us unused. Now, whether it be"  
"Bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple"  
"Of thinking too precisely on the event,"  
"A thought which, quarter'd, hath but one part wisdom"  
"And ever three parts coward, I do not know"  
"Why yet I live to say 'This thing's to do,'"  
"Sith I have cause and will and strength and means"  
"To do't. Examples gross as earth exhort me:"  
"Witness this army of such mass and charge"  
"Led by a delicate and tender prince,"  
"Whose spirit with divine ambition puff'd"  
"Makes mouths at the invisible event,"  
"Exposing what is mortal and unsure"  
"To all that fortune, death and danger dare,"  
"Even for an egg-shell. Rightly to be great"  
"Is not to stir without great argument,"  
"But greatly to find quarrel in a straw"  
"When honour's at the stake. How stand I then,"  
"That have a father kill'd, a mother stain'd,"  
"Excitements of my reason and my blood,"  
"And let all sleep? while, to my shame, I see"  
"The imminent death of twenty thousand men,"  
"That, for a fantasy and trick of fame,"  
"Go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot"  
"Whereon the numbers cannot try the cause,"  
"Which is not tomb enough and continent"  
"To hide the slain? O, from this time forth,"  
"My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!"  
Exit  
"SCENE V. Elsinore. A room in the castle."  
"Enter QUEEN GERTRUDE, HORATIO, and a Gentleman"  
"I will not speak with her."  
"She is importunate, indeed distract:"  
"Her mood will needs be pitied."  
"What would she have?"  
"She speaks much of her father, says she hears"  
"There's tricks i' the world, and hems, and beats her heart,"  
"Spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt,"  
"That carry but half sense: her speech is nothing,"  
"Yet the unshaped use of it doth move"  
"The hearers to collection, they aim at it,"  
"And botch the words up fit to their own thoughts,"  
"Which, as her winks, and nods, and gestures"  
"yield them,"  
"Indeed would make one think there might be thought,"  
"Though nothing sure, yet much unhappily."  
"'Twere good she were spoken with, for she may strew"  
"Dangerous conjectures in ill-breeding minds."  
"Let her come in."  
"Exit HORATIO"  
"To my sick soul, as sin's true nature is,"  
"Each toy seems prologue to some great amiss:"  
"So full of artless jealousy is guilt,"  
"It spills itself in fearing to be spilt."  
"Re-enter HORATIO, with OPHELIA"  
"Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark?"  
"How now, Ophelia!"  
[Sings]  
"How should I your true love know"  
"From another one?"  
"By his cockle hat and staff,"  
"And his sandal shoon."  
"Alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?"  
"Say you? nay, pray you, mark."  
Sings  
"He is dead and gone, lady,"  
"He is dead and gone,"  
"At his head a grass-green turf,"  
"At his heels a stone."  
"Nay, but, Ophelia,--"  
"Pray you, mark."  
Sings  
"White his shroud as the mountain snow,--"  
"Enter KING CLAUDIUS"  
"Alas, look here, my lord."  
[Sings]  
"Larded with sweet flowers"  
"Which bewept to the grave did go"  
"With true-love showers."  
"How do you, pretty lady?"  
"Well, God 'ild you! They say the owl was a baker's"  
"daughter. Lord, we know what we are, but know not"  
"what we may be. God be at your table!"  
"Conceit upon her father."  
"Pray you, let's have no words of this, but when they"  
"ask you what it means, say you this:"  
Sings  
"To-morrow is Saint Valentine's day,"  
"All in the morning betime,"  
"And I a maid at your window,"  
"To be your Valentine."  
"Then up he rose, and donn'd his clothes,"  
"And dupp'd the chamber-door,"  
"Let in the maid, that out a maid"  
"Never departed more."  
"Pretty Ophelia!"  
"Indeed, la, without an oath, I'll make an end on't:"  
Sings  
"By Gis and by Saint Charity,"  
"Alack, and fie for shame!"  
"Young men will do't, if they come to't,"  
"By cock, they are to blame."  
"Quoth she, before you tumbled me,"  
"You promised me to wed."  
"So would I ha' done, by yonder sun,"  
"An thou hadst not come to my bed."  
"How long hath she been thus?"  
"I hope all will be well. We must be patient: but I"  
"cannot choose but weep, to think they should lay him"  
"i' the cold ground. My brother shall know of it:"  
"and so I thank you for your good counsel. Come, my"  
"coach! Good night, ladies, good night, sweet ladies,"  
"good night, good night."  
Exit  
"Follow her close, give her good watch,"  
"I pray you."  
"Exit HORATIO"  
"O, this is the poison of deep grief, it springs"  
"All from her father's death. O Gertrude, Gertrude,"  
"When sorrows come, they come not single spies"  
"But in battalions. First, her father slain:"  
"Next, your son gone, and he most violent author"  
"Of his own just remove: the people muddied,"  
"Thick and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers,"  
"For good Polonius' death, and we have done but greenly,"  
"In hugger-mugger to inter him: poor Ophelia"  
"Divided from herself and her fair judgment,"  
"Without the which we are pictures, or mere beasts:"  
"Last, and as much containing as all these,"  
"Her brother is in secret come from France,"  
"Feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds,"  
"And wants not buzzers to infect his ear"  
"With pestilent speeches of his father's death,"  
"Wherein necessity, of matter beggar'd,"  
"Will nothing stick our person to arraign"  
"In ear and ear. O my dear Gertrude, this,"  
"Like to a murdering-piece, in many places"  
"Gives me superfluous death."  
"A noise within"  
"Alack, what noise is this?"  
"Where are my Switzers? Let them guard the door."  
"Enter another Gentleman"  
"What is the matter?"  
"Save yourself, my lord:"  
"The ocean, overpeering of his list,"  
"Eats not the flats with more impetuous haste"  
"Than young Laertes, in a riotous head,"  
"O'erbears your officers. The rabble call him lord,"  
"And, as the world were now but to begin,"  
"Antiquity forgot, custom not known,"  
"The ratifiers and props of every word,"  
"They cry 'Choose we: Laertes shall be king:'"  
"Caps, hands, and tongues, applaud it to the clouds:"  
"'Laertes shall be king, Laertes king!'"  
"How cheerfully on the false trail they cry!"  
"O, this is counter, you false Danish dogs!"  
"The doors are broke."  
"Noise within"  
"Enter LAERTES, armed, Danes following"  
"Where is this king? Sirs, stand you all without."  
"No, let's come in."  
"I pray you, give me leave."  
"We will, we will."  
"They retire without the door"  
"I thank you: keep the door. O thou vile king,"  
"Give me my father!"  
"Calmly, good Laertes."  
"That drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard,"  
"Cries cuckold to my father, brands the harlot"  
"Even here, between the chaste unsmirched brow"  
"Of my true mother."  
"What is the cause, Laertes,"  
"That thy rebellion looks so giant-like?"  
"Let him go, Gertrude, do not fear our person:"  
"There's such divinity doth hedge a king,"  
"That treason can but peep to what it would,"  
"Acts little of his will. Tell me, Laertes,"  
"Why thou art thus incensed. Let him go, Gertrude."  
"Speak, man."  
"Where is my father?"  
Dead.  
"But not by him."  
"Let him demand his fill."  
"How came he dead? I'll not be juggled with:"  
"To hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil!"  
"Conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit!"  
"I dare damnation. To this point I stand,"  
"That both the worlds I give to negligence,"  
"Let come what comes, only I'll be revenged"  
"Most thoroughly for my father."  
"Who shall stay you?"  
"My will, not all the world:"  
"And for my means, I'll husband them so well,"  
"They shall go far with little."  
"Good Laertes,"  
"If you desire to know the certainty"  
"Of your dear father's death, is't writ in your revenge,"  
"That, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and foe,"  
"Winner and loser?"  
"None but his enemies."  
"Will you know them then?"  
"To his good friends thus wide I'll ope my arms,"  
"And like the kind life-rendering pelican,"  
"Repast them with my blood."  
"Why, now you speak"  
"Like a good child and a true gentleman."  
"That I am guiltless of your father's death,"  
"And am most sensible in grief for it,"  
"It shall as level to your judgment pierce"  
"As day does to your eye."  
"[Within]                Let her come in."  
"How now! what noise is that?"  
"Re-enter OPHELIA"  
"O heat, dry up my brains! tears seven times salt,"  
"Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye!"  
"By heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight,"  
"Till our scale turn the beam. O rose of May!"  
"Dear maid, kind sister, sweet Ophelia!"  
"O heavens! is't possible, a young maid's wits"  
"Should be as moral as an old man's life?"  
"Nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine,"  
"It sends some precious instance of itself"  
"After the thing it loves."  
[Sings]  
"They bore him barefaced on the bier,"  
"Hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny,"  
"And in his grave rain'd many a tear:--"  
"Fare you well, my dove!"  
"Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge,"  
"It could not move thus."  
[Sings]  
"You must sing a-down a-down,"  
"An you call him a-down-a."  
"O, how the wheel becomes it! It is the false"  
"steward, that stole his master's daughter."  
"This nothing's more than matter."  
"There's rosemary, that's for remembrance, pray,"  
"love, remember: and there is pansies. that's for thoughts."  
"A document in madness, thoughts and remembrance fitted."  
"There's fennel for you, and columbines: there's rue"  
"for you, and here's some for me: we may call it"  
"herb-grace o' Sundays: O you must wear your rue with"  
"a difference. There's a daisy: I would give you"  
"some violets, but they withered all when my father"  
"died: they say he made a good end,--"  
Sings  
"For bonny sweet Robin is all my joy."  
"Thought and affliction, passion, hell itself,"  
"She turns to favour and to prettiness."  
[Sings]  
"And will he not come again?"  
"And will he not come again?"  
"No, no, he is dead:"  
"Go to thy death-bed:"  
"He never will come again."  
"His beard was as white as snow,"  
"All flaxen was his poll:"  
"He is gone, he is gone,"  
"And we cast away moan:"  
"God ha' mercy on his soul!"  
"And of all Christian souls, I pray God. God be wi' ye."  
Exit  
"Do you see this, O God?"  
"Laertes, I must commune with your grief,"  
"Or you deny me right. Go but apart,"  
"Make choice of whom your wisest friends you will."  
"And they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me:"  
"If by direct or by collateral hand"  
"They find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give,"  
"Our crown, our life, and all that we can ours,"  
"To you in satisfaction, but if not,"  
"Be you content to lend your patience to us,"  
"And we shall jointly labour with your soul"  
"To give it due content."  
"Let this be so,"  
"His means of death, his obscure funeral--"  
"No trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones,"  
"No noble rite nor formal ostentation--"  
"Cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth,"  
"That I must call't in question."  
"So you shall,"  
"And where the offence is let the great axe fall."  
"I pray you, go with me."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE VI. Another room in the castle."  
"Enter HORATIO and a Servant"  
"What are they that would speak with me?"  
"Sailors, sir: they say they have letters for you."  
"Let them come in."  
"Exit Servant"  
"I do not know from what part of the world"  
"I should be greeted, if not from Lord Hamlet."  
"Enter Sailors"  
"God bless you, sir."  
"Let him bless thee too."  
"He shall, sir, an't please him. There's a letter for"  
"you, sir, it comes from the ambassador that was"  
"bound for England, if your name be Horatio, as I am"  
"let to know it is."  
"[Reads]  'Horatio, when thou shalt have overlooked"  
"this, give these fellows some means to the king:"  
"they have letters for him. Ere we were two days old"  
"at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us"  
"chase. Finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on"  
"a compelled valour, and in the grapple I boarded"  
"them: on the instant they got clear of our ship, so"  
"I alone became their prisoner. They have dealt with"  
"me like thieves of mercy: but they knew what they"  
"did, I am to do a good turn for them. Let the king"  
"have the letters I have sent, and repair thou to me"  
"with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. I"  
"have words to speak in thine ear will make thee"  
"dumb, yet are they much too light for the bore of"  
"the matter. These good fellows will bring thee"  
"where I am. Rosencrantz and Guildenstern hold their"  
"course for England: of them I have much to tell"  
"thee. Farewell."  
"'He that thou knowest thine, HAMLET.'"  
"Come, I will make you way for these your letters,"  
"And do't the speedier, that you may direct me"  
"To him from whom you brought them."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE VII. Another room in the castle."  
"Enter KING CLAUDIUS and LAERTES"  
"Now must your conscience my acquaintance seal,"  
"And you must put me in your heart for friend,"  
"Sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear,"  
"That he which hath your noble father slain"  
"Pursued my life."  
"It well appears: but tell me"  
"Why you proceeded not against these feats,"  
"So crimeful and so capital in nature,"  
"As by your safety, wisdom, all things else,"  
"You mainly were stirr'd up."  
"O, for two special reasons,"  
"Which may to you, perhaps, seem much unsinew'd,"  
"But yet to me they are strong. The queen his mother"  
"Lives almost by his looks, and for myself--"  
"My virtue or my plague, be it either which--"  
"She's so conjunctive to my life and soul,"  
"That, as the star moves not but in his sphere,"  
"I could not but by her. The other motive,"  
"Why to a public count I might not go,"  
"Is the great love the general gender bear him,"  
"Who, dipping all his faults in their affection,"  
"Would, like the spring that turneth wood to stone,"  
"Convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows,"  
"Too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind,"  
"Would have reverted to my bow again,"  
"And not where I had aim'd them."  
"And so have I a noble father lost,"  
"A sister driven into desperate terms,"  
"Whose worth, if praises may go back again,"  
"Stood challenger on mount of all the age"  
"For her perfections: but my revenge will come."  
"Break not your sleeps for that: you must not think"  
"That we are made of stuff so flat and dull"  
"That we can let our beard be shook with danger"  
"And think it pastime. You shortly shall hear more:"  
"I loved your father, and we love ourself,"  
"And that, I hope, will teach you to imagine--"  
"Enter a Messenger"  
"How now! what news?"  
"Letters, my lord, from Hamlet:"  
"This to your majesty, this to the queen."  
"From Hamlet! who brought them?"  
"Sailors, my lord, they say, I saw them not:"  
"They were given me by Claudio, he received them"  
"Of him that brought them."  
"Laertes, you shall hear them. Leave us."  
"Exit Messenger"  
Reads  
"'High and mighty, You shall know I am set naked on"  
"your kingdom. To-morrow shall I beg leave to see"  
"your kingly eyes: when I shall, first asking your"  
"pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden"  
"and more strange return.                  'HAMLET.'"  
"What should this mean? Are all the rest come back?"  
"Or is it some abuse, and no such thing?"  
"Know you the hand?"  
"'Tis Hamlets character. 'Naked!"  
"And in a postscript here, he says 'alone.'"  
"Can you advise me?"  
"I'm lost in it, my lord. But let him come,"  
"It warms the very sickness in my heart,"  
"That I shall live and tell him to his teeth,"  
"'Thus didest thou.'"  
"If it be so, Laertes--"  
"As how should it be so? how otherwise?--"  
"Will you be ruled by me?"  
"Ay, my lord,"  
"So you will not o'errule me to a peace."  
"To thine own peace. If he be now return'd,"  
"As checking at his voyage, and that he means"  
"No more to undertake it, I will work him"  
"To an exploit, now ripe in my device,"  
"Under the which he shall not choose but fall:"  
"And for his death no wind of blame shall breathe,"  
"But even his mother shall uncharge the practise"  
"And call it accident."  
"My lord, I will be ruled,"  
"The rather, if you could devise it so"  
"That I might be the organ."  
"It falls right."  
"You have been talk'd of since your travel much,"  
"And that in Hamlet's hearing, for a quality"  
"Wherein, they say, you shine: your sum of parts"  
"Did not together pluck such envy from him"  
"As did that one, and that, in my regard,"  
"Of the unworthiest siege."  
"What part is that, my lord?"  
"A very riband in the cap of youth,"  
"Yet needful too, for youth no less becomes"  
"The light and careless livery that it wears"  
"Than settled age his sables and his weeds,"  
"Importing health and graveness. Two months since,"  
"Here was a gentleman of Normandy:--"  
"I've seen myself, and served against, the French,"  
"And they can well on horseback: but this gallant"  
"Had witchcraft in't, he grew unto his seat,"  
"And to such wondrous doing brought his horse,"  
"As he had been incorpsed and demi-natured"  
"With the brave beast: so far he topp'd my thought,"  
"That I, in forgery of shapes and tricks,"  
"Come short of what he did."  
"A Norman was't?"  
"A Norman."  
"Upon my life, Lamond."  
"The very same."  
"I know him well: he is the brooch indeed"  
"And gem of all the nation."  
"He made confession of you,"  
"And gave you such a masterly report"  
"For art and exercise in your defence"  
"And for your rapier most especially,"  
"That he cried out, 'twould be a sight indeed,"  
"If one could match you: the scrimers of their nation,"  
"He swore, had had neither motion, guard, nor eye,"  
"If you opposed them. Sir, this report of his"  
"Did Hamlet so envenom with his envy"  
"That he could nothing do but wish and beg"  
"Your sudden coming o'er, to play with him."  
"Now, out of this,--"  
"What out of this, my lord?"  
"Laertes, was your father dear to you?"  
"Or are you like the painting of a sorrow,"  
"A face without a heart?"  
"Why ask you this?"  
"Not that I think you did not love your father,"  
"But that I know love is begun by time,"  
"And that I see, in passages of proof,"  
"Time qualifies the spark and fire of it."  
"There lives within the very flame of love"  
"A kind of wick or snuff that will abate it,"  
"And nothing is at a like goodness still,"  
"For goodness, growing to a plurisy,"  
"Dies in his own too much: that we would do"  
"We should do when we would, for this 'would' changes"  
"And hath abatements and delays as many"  
"As there are tongues, are hands, are accidents,"  
"And then this 'should' is like a spendthrift sigh,"  
"That hurts by easing. But, to the quick o' the ulcer:--"  
"Hamlet comes back: what would you undertake,"  
"To show yourself your father's son in deed"  
"More than in words?"  
"To cut his throat i' the church."  
"No place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize,"  
"Revenge should have no bounds. But, good Laertes,"  
"Will you do this, keep close within your chamber."  
"Hamlet return'd shall know you are come home:"  
"We'll put on those shall praise your excellence"  
"And set a double varnish on the fame"  
"The Frenchman gave you, bring you in fine together"  
"And wager on your heads: he, being remiss,"  
"Most generous and free from all contriving,"  
"Will not peruse the foils, so that, with ease,"  
"Or with a little shuffling, you may choose"  
"A sword unbated, and in a pass of practise"  
"Requite him for your father."  
"I will do't:"  
"And, for that purpose, I'll anoint my sword."  
"I bought an unction of a mountebank,"  
"So mortal that, but dip a knife in it,"  
"Where it draws blood no cataplasm so rare,"  
"Collected from all simples that have virtue"  
"Under the moon, can save the thing from death"  
"That is but scratch'd withal: I'll touch my point"  
"With this contagion, that, if I gall him slightly,"  
"It may be death."  
"Let's further think of this,"  
"Weigh what convenience both of time and means"  
"May fit us to our shape: if this should fail,"  
"And that our drift look through our bad performance,"  
"'Twere better not assay'd: therefore this project"  
"Should have a back or second, that might hold,"  
"If this should blast in proof. Soft! let me see:"  
"We'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings: I ha't."  
"When in your motion you are hot and dry--"  
"As make your bouts more violent to that end--"  
"And that he calls for drink, I'll have prepared him"  
"A chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping,"  
"If he by chance escape your venom'd stuck,"  
"Our purpose may hold there."  
"Enter QUEEN GERTRUDE"  
"How now, sweet queen!"  
"One woe doth tread upon another's heel,"  
"So fast they follow, your sister's drown'd, Laertes."  
"Drown'd! O, where?"  
"There is a willow grows aslant a brook,"  
"That shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream,"  
"There with fantastic garlands did she come"  
"Of crow-flowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples"  
"That liberal shepherds give a grosser name,"  
"But our cold maids do dead men's fingers call them:"  
"There, on the pendent boughs her coronet weeds"  
"Clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke,"  
"When down her weedy trophies and herself"  
"Fell in the weeping brook. Her clothes spread wide,"  
"And, mermaid-like, awhile they bore her up:"  
"Which time she chanted snatches of old tunes,"  
"As one incapable of her own distress,"  
"Or like a creature native and indued"  
"Unto that element: but long it could not be"  
"Till that her garments, heavy with their drink,"  
"Pull'd the poor wretch from her melodious lay"  
"To muddy death."  
"Alas, then, she is drown'd?"  
"Drown'd, drown'd."  
"Too much of water hast thou, poor Ophelia,"  
"And therefore I forbid my tears: but yet"  
"It is our trick, nature her custom holds,"  
"Let shame say what it will: when these are gone,"  
"The woman will be out. Adieu, my lord:"  
"I have a speech of fire, that fain would blaze,"  
"But that this folly douts it."  
Exit  
"Let's follow, Gertrude:"  
"How much I had to do to calm his rage!"  
"Now fear I this will give it start again,"  
"Therefore let's follow."  
Exeunt  
"ACT V"  
"SCENE I. A churchyard."  
"Enter two Clowns, with spades,  and c"  
"Is she to be buried in Christian burial that"  
"wilfully seeks her own salvation?"  
"I tell thee she is: and therefore make her grave"  
"straight: the crowner hath sat on her, and finds it"  
"Christian burial."  
"How can that be, unless she drowned herself in her"  
"own defence?"  
"Why, 'tis found so."  
"It must be 'se offendendo,' it cannot be else. For"  
"here lies the point:  if I drown myself wittingly,"  
"it argues an act: and an act hath three branches: it"  
"is, to act, to do, to perform: argal, she drowned"  
"herself wittingly."  
"Nay, but hear you, goodman delver,--"  
"Give me leave. Here lies the water, good: here"  
"stands the man, good, if the man go to this water,"  
"and drown himself, it is, will he, nill he, he"  
"goes,--mark you that, but if the water come to him"  
"and drown him, he drowns not himself: argal, he"  
"that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his own life."  
"But is this law?"  
"Ay, marry, is't, crowner's quest law."  
"Will you ha' the truth on't? If this had not been"  
"a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o'"  
"Christian burial."  
"Why, there thou say'st: and the more pity that"  
"great folk should have countenance in this world to"  
"drown or hang themselves, more than their even"  
"Christian. Come, my spade. There is no ancient"  
"gentleman but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers:"  
"they hold up Adam's profession."  
"Was he a gentleman?"  
"He was the first that ever bore arms."  
"Why, he had none."  
"What, art a heathen? How dost thou understand the"  
"Scripture? The Scripture says 'Adam digged:'"  
"could he dig without arms? I'll put another"  
"question to thee: if thou answerest me not to the"  
"purpose, confess thyself--"  
"Go to."  
"What is he that builds stronger than either the"  
"mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?"  
"The gallows-maker, for that frame outlives a"  
"thousand tenants."  
"I like thy wit well, in good faith: the gallows"  
"does well, but how does it well? it does well to"  
"those that do in: now thou dost ill to say the"  
"gallows is built stronger than the church: argal,"  
"the gallows may do well to thee. To't again, come."  
"'Who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or"  
"a carpenter?'"  
"Ay, tell me that, and unyoke."  
"Marry, now I can tell."  
To't.  
"Mass, I cannot tell."  
"Enter HAMLET and HORATIO, at a distance"  
"Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull"  
"ass will not mend his pace with beating, and, when"  
"you are asked this question next, say 'a"  
"grave-maker: 'the houses that he makes last till"  
"doomsday. Go, get thee to Yaughan: fetch me a"  
"stoup of liquor."  
"Exit Second Clown"  
"He digs and sings"  
"In youth, when I did love, did love,"  
"Methought it was very sweet,"  
"To contract, O, the time, for, ah, my behove,"  
"O, methought, there was nothing meet."  
"Has this fellow no feeling of his business, that he"  
"sings at grave-making?"  
"Custom hath made it in him a property of easiness."  
"'Tis e'en so: the hand of little employment hath"  
"the daintier sense."  
[Sings]  
"But age, with his stealing steps,"  
"Hath claw'd me in his clutch,"  
"And hath shipped me intil the land,"  
"As if I had never been such."  
"Throws up a skull"  
"That skull had a tongue in it, and could sing once:"  
"how the knave jowls it to the ground, as if it were"  
"Cain's jaw-bone, that did the first murder! It"  
"might be the pate of a politician, which this ass"  
"now o'er-reaches, one that would circumvent God,"  
"might it not?"  
"It might, my lord."  
"Or of a courtier, which could say 'Good morrow,"  
"sweet lord! How dost thou, good lord?' This might"  
"be my lord such-a-one, that praised my lord"  
"such-a-one's horse, when he meant to beg it, might it not?"  
"Ay, my lord."  
"Why, e'en so: and now my Lady Worm's, chapless, and"  
"knocked about the mazzard with a sexton's spade:"  
"here's fine revolution, an we had the trick to"  
"see't. Did these bones cost no more the breeding,"  
"but to play at loggats with 'em? mine ache to think on't."  
[Sings]  
"A pick-axe, and a spade, a spade,"  
"For and a shrouding sheet:"  
"O, a pit of clay for to be made"  
"For such a guest is meet."  
"Throws up another skull"  
"There's another: why may not that be the skull of a"  
"lawyer? Where be his quiddities now, his quillets,"  
"his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? why does he"  
"suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the"  
"sconce with a dirty shovel, and will not tell him of"  
"his action of battery? Hum! This fellow might be"  
"in's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes,"  
"his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers,"  
"his recoveries: is this the fine of his fines, and"  
"the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine"  
"pate full of fine dirt? will his vouchers vouch him"  
"no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than"  
"the length and breadth of a pair of indentures? The"  
"very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in"  
"this box, and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?"  
"Not a jot more, my lord."  
"Is not parchment made of sheepskins?"  
"Ay, my lord, and of calf-skins too."  
"They are sheep and calves which seek out assurance"  
"in that. I will speak to this fellow. Whose"  
"grave's this, sirrah?"  
"Mine, sir."  
Sings  
"O, a pit of clay for to be made"  
"For such a guest is meet."  
"I think it be thine, indeed, for thou liest in't."  
"You lie out on't, sir, and therefore it is not"  
"yours: for my part, I do not lie in't, and yet it is mine."  
"'Thou dost lie in't, to be in't and say it is thine:"  
"'tis for the dead, not for the quick, therefore thou liest."  
"'Tis a quick lie, sir, 'twill away gain, from me to"  
you.  
"What man dost thou dig it for?"  
"For no man, sir."  
"What woman, then?"  
"For none, neither."  
"Who is to be buried in't?"  
"One that was a woman, sir, but, rest her soul, she's dead."  
"How absolute the knave is! we must speak by the"  
"card, or equivocation will undo us. By the Lord,"  
"Horatio, these three years I have taken a note of"  
"it, the age is grown so picked that the toe of the"  
"peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier, he"  
"gaffs his kibe. How long hast thou been a"  
grave-maker?  
"Of all the days i' the year, I came to't that day"  
"that our last king Hamlet overcame Fortinbras."  
"How long is that since?"  
"Cannot you tell that? every fool can tell that: it"  
"was the very day that young Hamlet was born, he that"  
"is mad, and sent into England."  
"Ay, marry, why was he sent into England?"  
"Why, because he was mad: he shall recover his wits"  
"there, or, if he do not, it's no great matter there."  
Why?  
"'Twill, a not be seen in him there, there the men"  
"are as mad as he."  
"How came he mad?"  
"Very strangely, they say."  
"How strangely?"  
"Faith, e'en with losing his wits."  
"Upon what ground?"  
"Why, here in Denmark: I have been sexton here, man"  
"and boy, thirty years."  
"How long will a man lie i' the earth ere he rot?"  
"I' faith, if he be not rotten before he die--as we"  
"have many pocky corses now-a-days, that will scarce"  
"hold the laying in--he will last you some eight year"  
"or nine year: a tanner will last you nine year."  
"Why he more than another?"  
"Why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade, that"  
"he will keep out water a great while, and your water"  
"is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body."  
"Here's a skull now, this skull has lain in the earth"  
"three and twenty years."  
"Whose was it?"  
"A whoreson mad fellow's it was: whose do you think it was?"  
"Nay, I know not."  
"A pestilence on him for a mad rogue! a' poured a"  
"flagon of Rhenish on my head once. This same skull,"  
"sir, was Yorick's skull, the king's jester."  
This?  
"E'en that."  
"Let me see."  
"Takes the skull"  
"Alas, poor Yorick! I knew him, Horatio: a fellow"  
"of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy: he hath"  
"borne me on his back a thousand times, and now, how"  
"abhorred in my imagination it is! my gorge rims at"  
"it. Here hung those lips that I have kissed I know"  
"not how oft. Where be your gibes now? your"  
"gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment,"  
"that were wont to set the table on a roar? Not one"  
"now, to mock your own grinning? quite chap-fallen?"  
"Now get you to my lady's chamber, and tell her, let"  
"her paint an inch thick, to this favour she must"  
"come, make her laugh at that. Prithee, Horatio, tell"  
"me one thing."  
"What's that, my lord?"  
"Dost thou think Alexander looked o' this fashion i'"  
"the earth?"  
"E'en so."  
"And smelt so? pah!"  
"Puts down the skull"  
"E'en so, my lord."  
"To what base uses we may return, Horatio! Why may"  
"not imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander,"  
"till he find it stopping a bung-hole?"  
"'Twere to consider too curiously, to consider so."  
"No, faith, not a jot, but to follow him thither with"  
"modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it: as"  
"thus: Alexander died, Alexander was buried,"  
"Alexander returneth into dust, the dust is earth, of"  
"earth we make loam, and why of that loam, whereto he"  
"was converted, might they not stop a beer-barrel?"  
"Imperious Caesar, dead and turn'd to clay,"  
"Might stop a hole to keep the wind away:"  
"O, that that earth, which kept the world in awe,"  
"Should patch a wall to expel the winter flaw!"  
"But soft! but soft! aside: here comes the king."  
"Enter Priest,  and c. in procession, the Corpse of  OPHELIA, LAERTES and Mourners following, KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, their trains,  and c"  
"The queen, the courtiers: who is this they follow?"  
"And with such maimed rites? This doth betoken"  
"The corse they follow did with desperate hand"  
"Fordo its own life: 'twas of some estate."  
"Couch we awhile, and mark."  
"Retiring with HORATIO"  
"What ceremony else?"  
"That is Laertes,"  
"A very noble youth: mark."  
"What ceremony else?"  
"Her obsequies have been as far enlarged"  
"As we have warrantise: her death was doubtful,"  
"And, but that great command o'ersways the order,"  
"She should in ground unsanctified have lodged"  
"Till the last trumpet: for charitable prayers,"  
"Shards, flints and pebbles should be thrown on her,"  
"Yet here she is allow'd her virgin crants,"  
"Her maiden strewments and the bringing home"  
"Of bell and burial."  
"Must there no more be done?"  
"No more be done:"  
"We should profane the service of the dead"  
"To sing a requiem and such rest to her"  
"As to peace-parted souls."  
"Lay her i' the earth:"  
"And from her fair and unpolluted flesh"  
"May violets spring! I tell thee, churlish priest,"  
"A ministering angel shall my sister be,"  
"When thou liest howling."  
"What, the fair Ophelia!"  
"Sweets to the sweet: farewell!"  
"Scattering flowers"  
"I hoped thou shouldst have been my Hamlet's wife,"  
"I thought thy bride-bed to have deck'd, sweet maid,"  
"And not have strew'd thy grave."  
"O, treble woe"  
"Fall ten times treble on that cursed head,"  
"Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense"  
"Deprived thee of! Hold off the earth awhile,"  
"Till I have caught her once more in mine arms:"  
"Leaps into the grave"  
"Now pile your dust upon the quick and dead,"  
"Till of this flat a mountain you have made,"  
"To o'ertop old Pelion, or the skyish head"  
"Of blue Olympus."  
"[Advancing]     What is he whose grief"  
"Bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow"  
"Conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand"  
"Like wonder-wounded hearers? This is I,"  
"Hamlet the Dane."  
"Leaps into the grave"  
"The devil take thy soul!"  
"Grappling with him"  
"Thou pray'st not well."  
"I prithee, take thy fingers from my throat,"  
"For, though I am not splenitive and rash,"  
"Yet have I something in me dangerous,"  
"Which let thy wiseness fear: hold off thy hand."  
"Pluck them asunder."  
"Hamlet, Hamlet!"  
Gentlemen,--  
"Good my lord, be quiet."  
"The Attendants part them, and they come out of the grave"  
"Why I will fight with him upon this theme"  
"Until my eyelids will no longer wag."  
"O my son, what theme?"  
"I loved Ophelia: forty thousand brothers"  
"Could not, with all their quantity of love,"  
"Make up my sum. What wilt thou do for her?"  
"O, he is mad, Laertes."  
"For love of God, forbear him."  
"'Swounds, show me what thou'lt do:"  
"Woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thyself?"  
"Woo't drink up eisel? eat a crocodile?"  
"I'll do't. Dost thou come here to whine?"  
"To outface me with leaping in her grave?"  
"Be buried quick with her, and so will I:"  
"And, if thou prate of mountains, let them throw"  
"Millions of acres on us, till our ground,"  
"Singeing his pate against the burning zone,"  
"Make Ossa like a wart! Nay, an thou'lt mouth,"  
"I'll rant as well as thou."  
"This is mere madness:"  
"And thus awhile the fit will work on him,"  
"Anon, as patient as the female dove,"  
"When that her golden couplets are disclosed,"  
"His silence will sit drooping."  
"Hear you, sir,"  
"What is the reason that you use me thus?"  
"I loved you ever: but it is no matter,"  
"Let Hercules himself do what he may,"  
"The cat will mew and dog will have his day."  
Exit  
"I pray you, good Horatio, wait upon him."  
"Exit HORATIO"  
"To LAERTES"  
"Strengthen your patience in our last night's speech,"  
"We'll put the matter to the present push."  
"Good Gertrude, set some watch over your son."  
"This grave shall have a living monument:"  
"An hour of quiet shortly shall we see,"  
"Till then, in patience our proceeding be."  
Exeunt  
"SCENE II. A hall in the castle."  
"Enter HAMLET and HORATIO"  
"So much for this, sir: now shall you see the other,"  
"You do remember all the circumstance?"  
"Remember it, my lord?"  
"Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting,"  
"That would not let me sleep: methought I lay"  
"Worse than the mutines in the bilboes. Rashly,"  
"And praised be rashness for it, let us know,"  
"Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well,"  
"When our deep plots do pall: and that should teach us"  
"There's a divinity that shapes our ends,"  
"Rough-hew them how we will,--"  
"That is most certain."  
"Up from my cabin,"  
"My sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark"  
"Groped I to find out them, had my desire."  
"Finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew"  
"To mine own room again, making so bold,"  
"My fears forgetting manners, to unseal"  
"Their grand commission, where I found, Horatio,--"  
"O royal knavery!--an exact command,"  
"Larded with many several sorts of reasons"  
"Importing Denmark's health and England's too,"  
"With, ho! such bugs and goblins in my life,"  
"That, on the supervise, no leisure bated,"  
"No, not to stay the grinding of the axe,"  
"My head should be struck off."  
"Is't possible?"  
"Here's the commission: read it at more leisure."  
"But wilt thou hear me how I did proceed?"  
"I beseech you."  
"Being thus be-netted round with villanies,--"  
"Ere I could make a prologue to my brains,"  
"They had begun the play--I sat me down,"  
"Devised a new commission, wrote it fair:"  
"I once did hold it, as our statists do,"  
"A baseness to write fair and labour'd much"  
"How to forget that learning, but, sir, now"  
"It did me yeoman's service: wilt thou know"  
"The effect of what I wrote?"  
"Ay, good my lord."  
"An earnest conjuration from the king,"  
"As England was his faithful tributary,"  
"As love between them like the palm might flourish,"  
"As peace should stiff her wheaten garland wear"  
"And stand a comma 'tween their amities,"  
"And many such-like 'As'es of great charge,"  
"That, on the view and knowing of these contents,"  
"Without debatement further, more or less,"  
"He should the bearers put to sudden death,"  
"Not shriving-time allow'd."  
"How was this seal'd?"  
"Why, even in that was heaven ordinant."  
"I had my father's signet in my purse,"  
"Which was the model of that Danish seal,"  
"Folded the writ up in form of the other,"  
"Subscribed it, gave't the impression, placed it safely,"  
"The changeling never known. Now, the next day"  
"Was our sea-fight, and what to this was sequent"  
"Thou know'st already."  
"So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to't."  
"Why, man, they did make love to this employment,"  
"They are not near my conscience, their defeat"  
"Does by their own insinuation grow:"  
"'Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes"  
"Between the pass and fell incensed points"  
"Of mighty opposites."  
"Why, what a king is this!"  
"Does it not, think'st thee, stand me now upon--"  
"He that hath kill'd my king and whored my mother,"  
"Popp'd in between the election and my hopes,"  
"Thrown out his angle for my proper life,"  
"And with such cozenage--is't not perfect conscience,"  
"To quit him with this arm? and is't not to be damn'd,"  
"To let this canker of our nature come"  
"In further evil?"  
"It must be shortly known to him from England"  
"What is the issue of the business there."  
"It will be short: the interim is mine,"  
"And a man's life's no more than to say 'One.'"  
"But I am very sorry, good Horatio,"  
"That to Laertes I forgot myself,"  
"For, by the image of my cause, I see"  
"The portraiture of his: I'll court his favours."  
"But, sure, the bravery of his grief did put me"  
"Into a towering passion."  
"Peace! who comes here?"  
"Enter OSRIC"  
"Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark."  
"I humbly thank you, sir. Dost know this water-fly?"  
"No, my good lord."  
"Thy state is the more gracious, for 'tis a vice to"  
"know him. He hath much land, and fertile: let a"  
"beast be lord of beasts, and his crib shall stand at"  
"the king's mess: 'tis a chough, but, as I say,"  
"spacious in the possession of dirt."  
"Sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, I"  
"should impart a thing to you from his majesty."  
"I will receive it, sir, with all diligence of"  
"spirit. Put your bonnet to his right use, 'tis for the head."  
"I thank your lordship, it is very hot."  
"No, believe me, 'tis very cold, the wind is"  
northerly.  
"It is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed."  
"But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my"  
complexion.  
"Exceedingly, my lord, it is very sultry,--as"  
"'twere,--I cannot tell how. But, my lord, his"  
"majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a"  
"great wager on your head: sir, this is the matter,--"  
"I beseech you, remember--"  
"HAMLET moves him to put on his hat"  
"Nay, good my lord, for mine ease, in good faith."  
"Sir, here is newly come to court Laertes, believe"  
"me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent"  
"differences, of very soft society and great showing:"  
"indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or"  
"calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the"  
"continent of what part a gentleman would see."  
"Sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you,"  
"though, I know, to divide him inventorially would"  
"dizzy the arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw"  
"neither, in respect of his quick sail. But, in the"  
"verity of extolment, I take him to be a soul of"  
"great article, and his infusion of such dearth and"  
"rareness, as, to make true diction of him, his"  
"semblable is his mirror, and who else would trace"  
"him, his umbrage, nothing more."  
"Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him."  
"The concernancy, sir? why do we wrap the gentleman"  
"in our more rawer breath?"  
Sir?  
"Is't not possible to understand in another tongue?"  
"You will do't, sir, really."  
"What imports the nomination of this gentleman?"  
"Of Laertes?"  
"His purse is empty already, all's golden words are spent."  
"Of him, sir."  
"I know you are not ignorant--"  
"I would you did, sir, yet, in faith, if you did,"  
"it would not much approve me. Well, sir?"  
"You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is--"  
"I dare not confess that, lest I should compare with"  
"him in excellence, but, to know a man well, were to"  
"know himself."  
"I mean, sir, for his weapon, but in the imputation"  
"laid on him by them, in his meed he's unfellowed."  
"What's his weapon?"  
"Rapier and dagger."  
"That's two of his weapons: but, well."  
"The king, sir, hath wagered with him six Barbary"  
"horses: against the which he has imponed, as I take"  
"it, six French rapiers and poniards, with their"  
"assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so: three of the"  
"carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very"  
"responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages,"  
"and of very liberal conceit."  
"What call you the carriages?"  
"I knew you must be edified by the margent ere you had done."  
"The carriages, sir, are the hangers."  
"The phrase would be more german to the matter, if we"  
"could carry cannon by our sides: I would it might"  
"be hangers till then. But, on: six Barbary horses"  
"against six French swords, their assigns, and three"  
"liberal-conceited carriages, that's the French bet"  
"against the Danish. Why is this 'imponed,' as you call it?"  
"The king, sir, hath laid, that in a dozen passes"  
"between yourself and him, he shall not exceed you"  
"three hits: he hath laid on twelve for nine, and it"  
"would come to immediate trial, if your lordship"  
"would vouchsafe the answer."  
"How if I answer 'no'?"  
"I mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial."  
"Sir, I will walk here in the hall: if it please his"  
"majesty, 'tis the breathing time of day with me, let"  
"the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the"  
"king hold his purpose, I will win for him an I can,"  
"if not, I will gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits."  
"Shall I re-deliver you e'en so?"  
"To this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will."  
"I commend my duty to your lordship."  
"Yours, yours."  
"Exit OSRIC"  
"He does well to commend it himself, there are no"  
"tongues else for's turn."  
"This lapwing runs away with the shell on his head."  
"He did comply with his dug, before he sucked it."  
"Thus has he--and many more of the same bevy that I"  
"know the dressy age dotes on--only got the tune of"  
"the time and outward habit of encounter, a kind of"  
"yesty collection, which carries them through and"  
"through the most fond and winnowed opinions, and do"  
"but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out."  
"Enter a Lord"  
"My lord, his majesty commended him to you by young"  
"Osric, who brings back to him that you attend him in"  
"the hall: he sends to know if your pleasure hold to"  
"play with Laertes, or that you will take longer time."  
"I am constant to my purpose, they follow the king's"  
"pleasure: if his fitness speaks, mine is ready, now"  
"or whensoever, provided I be so able as now."  
"The king and queen and all are coming down."  
"In happy time."  
"The queen desires you to use some gentle"  
"entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play."  
"She well instructs me."  
"Exit Lord"  
"You will lose this wager, my lord."  
"I do not think so: since he went into France, I"  
"have been in continual practise: I shall win at the"  
"odds. But thou wouldst not think how ill all's here"  
"about my heart: but it is no matter."  
"Nay, good my lord,--"  
"It is but foolery, but it is such a kind of"  
"gain-giving, as would perhaps trouble a woman."  
"If your mind dislike any thing, obey it: I will"  
"forestall their repair hither, and say you are not"  
fit.  
"Not a whit, we defy augury: there's a special"  
"providence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now,"  
"'tis not to come, if it be not to come, it will be"  
"now, if it be not now, yet it will come: the"  
"readiness is all: since no man has aught of what he"  
"leaves, what is't to leave betimes?"  
"Enter KING CLAUDIUS, QUEEN GERTRUDE, LAERTES, Lords, OSRIC, and Attendants with foils,  and c"  
"Come, Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me."  
"KING CLAUDIUS puts LAERTES' hand into HAMLET's"  
"Give me your pardon, sir: I've done you wrong,"  
"But pardon't, as you are a gentleman."  
"This presence knows,"  
"And you must needs have heard, how I am punish'd"  
"With sore distraction. What I have done,"  
"That might your nature, honour and exception"  
"Roughly awake, I here proclaim was madness."  
"Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Never Hamlet:"  
"If Hamlet from himself be ta'en away,"  
"And when he's not himself does wrong Laertes,"  
"Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it."  
"Who does it, then? His madness: if't be so,"  
"Hamlet is of the faction that is wrong'd,"  
"His madness is poor Hamlet's enemy."  
"Sir, in this audience,"  
"Let my disclaiming from a purposed evil"  
"Free me so far in your most generous thoughts,"  
"That I have shot mine arrow o'er the house,"  
"And hurt my brother."  
"I am satisfied in nature,"  
"Whose motive, in this case, should stir me most"  
"To my revenge: but in my terms of honour"  
"I stand aloof, and will no reconcilement,"  
"Till by some elder masters, of known honour,"  
"I have a voice and precedent of peace,"  
"To keep my name ungored. But till that time,"  
"I do receive your offer'd love like love,"  
"And will not wrong it."  
"I embrace it freely,"  
"And will this brother's wager frankly play."  
"Give us the foils. Come on."  
"Come, one for me."  
"I'll be your foil, Laertes: in mine ignorance"  
"Your skill shall, like a star i' the darkest night,"  
"Stick fiery off indeed."  
"You mock me, sir."  
"No, by this hand."  
"Give them the foils, young Osric. Cousin Hamlet,"  
"You know the wager?"  
"Very well, my lord"  
"Your grace hath laid the odds o' the weaker side."  
"I do not fear it, I have seen you both:"  
"But since he is better'd, we have therefore odds."  
"This is too heavy, let me see another."  
"This likes me well. These foils have all a length?"  
"They prepare to play"  
"Ay, my good lord."  
"Set me the stoops of wine upon that table."  
"If Hamlet give the first or second hit,"  
"Or quit in answer of the third exchange,"  
"Let all the battlements their ordnance fire:"  
"The king shall drink to Hamlet's better breath,"  
"And in the cup an union shall he throw,"  
"Richer than that which four successive kings"  
"In Denmark's crown have worn. Give me the cups,"  
"And let the kettle to the trumpet speak,"  
"The trumpet to the cannoneer without,"  
"The cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth,"  
"'Now the king dunks to Hamlet.' Come, begin:"  
"And you, the judges, bear a wary eye."  
"Come on, sir."  
"Come, my lord."  
"They play"  
One.  
No.  
Judgment.  
"A hit, a very palpable hit."  
"Well, again."  
"Stay, give me drink. Hamlet, this pearl is thine,"  
"Here's to thy health."  
"Trumpets sound, and cannon shot off within"  
"Give him the cup."  
"I'll play this bout first, set it by awhile. Come."  
"They play"  
"Another hit, what say you?"  
"A touch, a touch, I do confess."  
"Our son shall win."  
"He's fat, and scant of breath."  
"Here, Hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows,"  
"The queen carouses to thy fortune, Hamlet."  
"Good madam!"  
"Gertrude, do not drink."  
"I will, my lord, I pray you, pardon me."  
"[Aside]  It is the poison'd cup: it is too late."  
"I dare not drink yet, madam, by and by."  
"Come, let me wipe thy face."  
"My lord, I'll hit him now."  
"I do not think't."  
"[Aside]  And yet 'tis almost 'gainst my conscience."  
"Come, for the third, Laertes: you but dally,"  
"I pray you, pass with your best violence,"  
"I am afeard you make a wanton of me."  
"Say you so? come on."  
"They play"  
"Nothing, neither way."  
"Have at you now!"  
"LAERTES wounds HAMLET, then in scuffling, they change rapiers, and HAMLET wounds LAERTES"  
"Part them, they are incensed."  
"Nay, come, again."  
"QUEEN GERTRUDE falls"  
"Look to the queen there, ho!"  
"They bleed on both sides. How is it, my lord?"  
"How is't, Laertes?"  
"Why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, Osric,"  
"I am justly kill'd with mine own treachery."  
"How does the queen?"  
"She swounds to see them bleed."  
"No, no, the drink, the drink,--O my dear Hamlet,--"  
"The drink, the drink! I am poison'd."  
Dies  
"O villany! Ho! let the door be lock'd:"  
"Treachery! Seek it out."  
"It is here, Hamlet: Hamlet, thou art slain,"  
"No medicine in the world can do thee good,"  
"In thee there is not half an hour of life,"  
"The treacherous instrument is in thy hand,"  
"Unbated and envenom'd: the foul practise"  
"Hath turn'd itself on me lo, here I lie,"  
"Never to rise again: thy mother's poison'd:"  
"I can no more: the king, the king's to blame."  
"The point!--envenom'd too!"  
"Then, venom, to thy work."  
"Stabs KING CLAUDIUS"  
"Treason! treason!"  
"O, yet defend me, friends, I am but hurt."  
"Here, thou incestuous, murderous, damned Dane,"  
"Drink off this potion. Is thy union here?"  
"Follow my mother."  
"KING CLAUDIUS dies"  
"He is justly served,"  
"It is a poison temper'd by himself."  
"Exchange forgiveness with me, noble Hamlet:"  
"Mine and my father's death come not upon thee,"  
"Nor thine on me."  
Dies  
"Heaven make thee free of it! I follow thee."  
"I am dead, Horatio. Wretched queen, adieu!"  
"You that look pale and tremble at this chance,"  
"That are but mutes or audience to this act,"  
"Had I but time--as this fell sergeant, death,"  
"Is strict in his arrest--O, I could tell you--"  
"But let it be. Horatio, I am dead,"  
"Thou livest, report me and my cause aright"  
"To the unsatisfied."  
"Never believe it:"  
"I am more an antique Roman than a Dane:"  
"Here's yet some liquor left."  
"As thou'rt a man,"  
"Give me the cup: let go, by heaven, I'll have't."  
"O good Horatio, what a wounded name,"  
"Things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me!"  
"If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart"  
"Absent thee from felicity awhile,"  
"And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain,"  
"To tell my story."  
"March afar off, and shot within"  
"What warlike noise is this?"  
"Young Fortinbras, with conquest come from Poland,"  
"To the ambassadors of England gives"  
"This warlike volley."  
"O, I die, Horatio,"  
"The potent poison quite o'er-crows my spirit:"  
"I cannot live to hear the news from England,"  
"But I do prophesy the election lights"  
"On Fortinbras: he has my dying voice,"  
"So tell him, with the occurrents, more and less,"  
"Which have solicited. The rest is silence."  
Dies  
"Now cracks a noble heart. Good night sweet prince:"  
"And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!"  
"Why does the drum come hither?"  
"March within"  
"Enter FORTINBRAS, the English Ambassadors, and others"  
"Where is this sight?"  
"What is it ye would see?"  
"If aught of woe or wonder, cease your search."  
"This quarry cries on havoc. O proud death,"  
"What feast is toward in thine eternal cell,"  
"That thou so many princes at a shot"  
"So bloodily hast struck?"  
"The sight is dismal,"  
"And our affairs from England come too late:"  
"The ears are senseless that should give us hearing,"  
"To tell him his commandment is fulfill'd,"  
"That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead:"  
"Where should we have our thanks?"  
"Not from his mouth,"  
"Had it the ability of life to thank you:"  
"He never gave commandment for their death."  
"But since, so jump upon this bloody question,"  
"You from the Polack wars, and you from England,"  
"Are here arrived give order that these bodies"  
"High on a stage be placed to the view,"  
"And let me speak to the yet unknowing world"  
"How these things came about: so shall you hear"  
"Of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts,"  
"Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters,"  
"Of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause,"  
"And, in this upshot, purposes mistook"  
"Fall'n on the inventors' reads: all this can I"  
"Truly deliver."  
"Let us haste to hear it,"  
"And call the noblest to the audience."  
"For me, with sorrow I embrace my fortune:"  
"I have some rights of memory in this kingdom,"  
"Which now to claim my vantage doth invite me."  
"Of that I shall have also cause to speak,"  
"And from his mouth whose voice will draw on more,"  
"But let this same be presently perform'd,"  
"Even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance"  
"On plots and errors, happen."  
"Let four captains"  
"Bear Hamlet, like a soldier, to the stage,"  
"For he was likely, had he been put on,"  
"To have proved most royally: and, for his passage,"  
"The soldiers' music and the rites of war"  
"Speak loudly for him."  
"Take up the bodies: such a sight as this"  
"Becomes the field, but here shows much amiss." 
}